

1. The first edition of ROMEO AND JULIET was published in 1597, with
the following title:

    AN | EXCELLENT | conceited Tragedie | _OF_ | Romeo and
    Iuliet, | As it hath been often (with great applause) | plaid
    publiquely, by the right Ho-|nourable the L. of _Hunsdon_ | his
    Seruants. | LONDON, | Printed by Iohn Danter. | 1597. |

After Sig. D, a smaller type is used for the rest of the play, and the
running title is changed from 'The most excellent Tragedie, of Romeo
and Iuliet' to 'The excellent Tragedie of Romeo and Iuliet.'

The text of this first Quarto differs so widely from that of later and
more perfect editions, that it is impossible to record the results of a
collation in footnotes: we have therefore reprinted it. When we refer
to it in the notes, it is designated as (Q1), the marks of parenthesis
being used as in similar cases previously.

An opinion has been entertained by some critics that in this earliest
Quarto we have a fairly accurate version of the play as it was at
first written; and that in the interval between the publication of
the first and second Quartos, the play was revised and recast by its
author into the form in which it appears in the edition of 1599. A
careful examination of the earlier text will, we think, prove this
notion to be untenable. Not to speak of minor errors, it is impossible
that Shakespeare should ever have given to the world a composition
containing so many instances of imperfect sense, halting metre, bad
grammar, and abrupt dialogue. We believe that the play, as at first
written, was substantially the same as that given in the later
editions; and that the defects of the first impression are due, not
to the author, but to the writer of the manuscript from which that
first impression was printed. That manuscript was, in all probability,
obtained from notes taken in short-hand during the representation: a
practice which we know to have been common in those days. It is true
that the text of (Q1) is more accurate on the whole than might have
been expected from such an origin; but the short-hand writer may have
been a man of unusual intelligence and skill, and may have been present
at many representations in order to correct his work; or possibly some
of the players may have helped him either from memory, or by lending
their parts in manuscript. But the examples of omission and conjectural
insertion are too frequent and too palpable to allow of the supposition
that the earliest text is derived from a bona fide transcript of the
author's MS. The unusual precision of some stage directions in (Q1)
tends to confirm our view of its origin; a view which is supported
by the high authority of M. Tycho Mommsen. The portions of the play
omitted in (Q1), though necessary to its artistic completeness and to
its effect as a poem, are for the most part passages which might be
spared without disturbing the consecutive and intelligible developement
of the action. It is possible therefore that the play as seen by the
short-hand writer was curtailed in the representation.

The second Quarto was in all likelihood an edition authorized
by Shakespeare and his 'fellows,' and intended to supersede the
surreptitious and imperfect edition of 1597. The play so published,
we believe, as we have said, to be substantially identical with the
play as at first composed; it seems however to have been revised by
the author. Here and there a passage appears to have been rewritten.
Compare, for example, (Q1) Sc. 10, lines 11-30 (p. 169 of the reprint)
with the corresponding passages of the later editions, Act II. Sc. 6,
lines 16-36. In this place assuredly the change must be attributed
to the author; but we know of no other passage of equal length where
the same can be affirmed with certainty. The words 'newly corrected,
augmented, and amended,' found on the title-page of the second Quarto,
may be accepted as the statement of a fact, when thus confirmed by
internal evidence. Otherwise we know that the assertions in titlepages
or prefaces of that time are not to be relied on, nor in this case
would the words necessarily mean more than that this second edition
was more correct and more complete than the first. In fact, the added
matter amounts nearly to a quarter of the whole.

The title-page of the second Quarto, Q2, is as follows:

    THE | MOST EX-| cellent and lamentable | Tragedie, of Romeo |
    and _Iuliet_. | _Newly corrected, augmented, and | amended_: |
    As it hath bene sundry times publiquely acted, by the | right
    Honourable the Lord Chamberlaine | his Seruants | LONDON. |
    Printed by Thomas Creede, for Cuthbert Burby, and are to | be
    sold at his shop neare the Exchange. | 1599. |

This is unquestionably our best authority; nevertheless in determining
the text, (Q1) must in many places be taken into account. For it is
certain that Q2 was not printed from the author's MS., but from a
transcript, the writer of which was not only careless, but thought fit
to take unwarrantable liberties with the text. In passing through his
hands, many passages were thus transmuted from poetry to prose. Pope
felt this strongly, too strongly indeed, for he adopted the text of the
first Quarto in many places where Capell and all subsequent editors
have judiciously recurred to the second. Nevertheless there is no
editor who has not felt it necessary occasionally to call in the aid of
the first. We think that M. Tycho Mommsen rates the authority of the
second Quarto too highly. Any rare form of word or strange construction
found in this edition alone, and corrected in all that follow, may
more probably be assigned to the transcriber (or in some cases to the
printer) than to Shakespeare, whose language is singularly free from
archaisms and provincialisms.

The third Quarto, Q3, was published in 1609, with the following
title-page:

    THE | MOST EX-CELLENT AND | Lamentable Tragedie, of | _Romeo_
    _and Juliet_. | As it hath beene sundrie times publiquely
    Acted, | by the KINGS Maiesties Seruants | at the Globe. |
    Newly corrected, augmented, and | amended: | LONDON | Printed
    for IOHN SMETHVVICK, and are to be sold | at his Shop in Saint
    _Dunstanes_ Church-yard, | in Fleetestreete vnder the Dyall |
    1609 |.

It was printed from Q2, from which it differs by a few corrections, and
more frequently by additional errors.

The next Quarto has no date.

Its title-page bears for the first time the name of the author. After
the word 'GLOBE' and in a separate line we find the words: 'Written by
W. _Shake-speare_.' Otherwise, except in some slight variations of type
and spelling, the title-page of the undated Quarto does not differ from
that of Q3. It was also printed '_for Iohn Smethwicke_,' without the
mention of the printer's name.

Though this edition has no date, internal evidence conclusively proves
that it was printed from Q3 and that the Quarto of 1637 was printed
from it. We therefore call it Q4.

It contains some very important corrections of the text, none however
that an intelligent reader might not make conjecturally and without
reference to any other authority. Indeed had the corrector been able to
refer to any such authority, he would not have left so many obviously
corrupt passages untouched.

The title-page of the fifth Quarto, our Q5, is substantially identical
with that of Q4, except that it is said to be printed 'by _R. Young_
for _John Smethwicke_,' and dated, 1637.

It is printed, as we have said, from Q4. The punctuation has been
carefully regulated throughout, and the spelling in many cases made
uniform.

The symbol Qq signifies the agreement of Q2, Q3, Q4, and Q5.

The text of the first Folio is taken from that of the third Quarto. As
usual there are a number of changes, some accidental, some deliberate,
but all generally for the worse, excepting the changes in punctuation
and in the stage-directions. The punctuation, as a rule, is more
correct, and the stage-directions are more complete, in the Folio.

The text of the second Folio is printed of course from the first. In
this play there are found in it a considerable number of conjectural
emendations, not generally happy, and perhaps more than the usual
number of errors.

A careful study of the text of _Romeo and Juliet_ will show how little
we can rely upon having the true text, as Shakespeare wrote it, in
those plays for which the Folio is our earliest authority.

M. Tycho Mommsen published in 1859 a reprint of the first and second
Quartos on opposite pages, and in the footnotes a collation of the
remaining Quartos (not quite complete in the case of the fourth and
fifth), the four Folios, Rowe's first edition, and the new readings
of Mr Collier's MS. corrector. The volume is preceded by learned and
valuable 'Prolegomena,' and the collation, which we have tested, is
done with great care and accuracy. If our collation, so far as it
occupies the same ground, may claim to be not less accurate, it must
be remembered, first, that we have not endeavoured to record every
minute variation of typography, but only such as were in our judgement
significant or otherwise noteworthy; secondly, that we have had in all
cases the original editions to refer to; and thirdly, that we have had
the advantage of comparing our collation with his, and, wherever we
found a discrepancy, verifying by a reference to the old copies.

Of the many alterations of _Romeo and Juliet_ we have only had occasion
to quote Otway's _Caius Marius_.

       *       *       *       *       *

2. TIMON OF ATHENS was printed for the first time in the Folio of
1623. It is called _The Life of Tymon of Athens_; in the running
titles, _Timon of Athens_; and occupies twenty-one pages, from 80 to 98
inclusive, 81 and 82 being numbered twice over. After 98 the next page
is filled with _The Actors Names_, and the following page is blank. The
next page, the first of _Julius CÃ¦sar_, is numbered 109, and instead
of beginning as it should signature _ii_, the signature is _kk_. From
this it may be inferred that for some reason the printing of _Julius
CÃ¦sar_ was commenced before that of _Timon_ was finished. It may be
that the manuscript of _Timon_ was imperfect, and that the printing was
stayed till it could be completed by some playwright engaged for the
purpose. This would account for the manifest imperfections at the close
of the play. But it is difficult to conceive how the printer came to
miscalculate so widely the space required to be left.

The well-known carelessness of the printers of the Folio in respect of
metre will not suffice to account for the deficiencies of _Timon_. The
original play, on which Shakespeare worked, must have been written, for
the most part, either in prose or in very irregular verse.

       *       *       *       *       *

3. JULIUS CÃSAR was published for the first time in the Folio of 1623.
It is more correctly printed than any other play, and may perhaps have
been (as the preface falsely implied that all were) printed from the
original manuscript of the author.

The references to Jennens in the notes are to his edition of _Julius
CÃ¦sar_, 'collated with the old and modern editions', and published in
1774.

       *       *       *       *       *

4. MACBETH, which follows next in order, was also printed for the first
time in that volume. Except that it is divided into scenes as well as
acts, it is one of the worst printed of all the plays, especially as
regards the metre, and not a few passages are hopelessly corrupt.

'Davenant's version,' quoted in our notes, was published in 1673.
Jennen's edition was printed in 1773. The edition of Macbeth by Harry
Rowe is attributed to Dr A. Hunter, and as such we have quoted it. Of
this we may remark that it is not always quite certain whether the
editor is in jest or earnest. 'Shakespeare restored' by Mr Hastings
Elwin is an edition of _Macbeth_ with introduction and notes, which was
anonymously and privately printed at Norwich in 1853.

                                                                W. G. C.

                                                                W. A. W.




ADDENDA.


_Romeo and Juliet_:

  I. 1. 178.      _sick health_] _sicknes, helth_ 'England's Parnassus.'
  I. 1. 191.      _discreet_] _distrest_ 'England's Parnassus.'
  II. 3. 2.       _Chequering_] _Cheering_ 'England's Parnassus.'
  II. 6. 20.      _fall; so_] _full so_ 'England's Parnassus.'
  III. 5. 10.     _mountain tops_] _mountaines top_ 'England's Parnassus.'


_Timon of Athens_:

  I. 1. 56.       _creatures_] _creature_ Maginn conj.
  I. 1. 235.      _no angry wit_] _no argument_ Bullock conj.
  I. 2. (stage direction) like himself.] by himself. Maginn conj.
  I. 2. 68.       _sin_] _dine_ Bullock conj.
  I. 2. 69, 70.   _Much ..._ Tim.] Tim. _Such food doth thy heart good._
                      Bullock conj.
  II. 2. 143.     _hear ... late--_] _are now too late--_ Bullock conj.
  III. 1. 40.     _solidares_] _saludores_ (i.e. _saluts-d'or_) Maginn
                      conj.
  III. 3. 8.      _Has Ventidius_] _Lucius, Ventidius_ Lloyd conj.
  III. 3. 11, 12. _His ... Thrive, give_] _His ... Shrink, give_ Bullock
                      conj.
                              _Three friends like physicians Give_ Lloyd
                      conj.,
                              ending lines 9, 10 at _shows ... must I_.
  III. 4. 111.    _So fitly?_] _So, fitly_: Lloyd conj.
  III. 6. 78.     _are. The ... fees_] _are--the worst of your foes_
                      Bullock conj.
  IV. 3. 133.     _whores, a bawd_] _whores abound_ Bullock conj.
  V. 2. 8.        _a particular_] _up articular_ Bullock conj.


_Julius CÃ¦sar_:

  III. 1. 263.    _men_] _Rome_ Bullock conj.
  IV. 1. 44.      _our means stretch'd_] _our means, our plans, sketch'd
                      out_
                              Bullock conj.
  IV. 3. 9.       _Let_] _But let_ Lloyd conj.
  IV. 3. 106.     For _Sheath_ read _Sheathe_.




ROMEO AND JULIET.




DRAMATIS PERSONÃ[1].


  ESCALUS, prince of Verona.
  PARIS, a young nobleman, kinsman to the prince.
  MONTAGUE, }   heads of two houses at variance with each other.
  CAPULET,  }
  An old man, of the Capulet family.
  ROMEO, son to Montague.
  MERCUTIO, kinsman to the prince, and friend to Romeo.
  BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo.
  TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
  FRIAR LAURENCE, a Franciscan.
  FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
  BALTHASAR, Servant to Romeo.
  SAMPSON,  } servants to Capulet.
  GREGORY,  }
  PETER, servant to Juliet's nurse.
  ABRAHAM, servant to Montague.
  An Apothecary.
  Three Musicians.
  Page to Paris; another Page; an Officer.

  LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
  LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
  JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
  Nurse to Juliet.

     Citizens of Verona; kinsfolk of both houses; Maskers, Guards,
                       Watchmen, and Attendants.

                                Chorus.

                        SCENE: _Verona: Mantua_.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] DRAMATIS PERSONÃ. First given, imperfectly, by Rowe.




PROLOGUE.


                           _Enter_ CHORUS.[2]

    _Chor._ Two households, both alike in dignity,[3]
      In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,[3]
    From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,[3]
      Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.[3]
    From forth the fatal loins of these two foes[3]                    5
      A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;[3]
    Whose misadventured piteous overthrows[3]
      Do with their death bury their parents' strife.[3][4]
    The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,[3]
      And the continuance of their parents' rage,[3]                  10
    Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,[3]
      Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;[3]
    The which if you with patient ears attend,[3]
    What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.[3][5]

FOOTNOTES:

[2] PROLOGUE. Enter Chorus. Chor.] (Q1). The Prologue. Corus. Q2. The
Prologue. Chorus. Q3 Q4 Q5. om. Ff.

[3] _Two ... mend._] Omitted in Ff and Rowe.

[4] _Do_] Pope. _Doth_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5.

[5] _here_] _heare_ Q2.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _Verona. A public place._[6]

     _Enter_ SAMPSON _and_ GREGORY, _of the house of Capulet, with_
                         _swords and bucklers._

    _Sam._ Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.[7]

    _Gre._ No, for then we should be colliers.

    _Sam._ I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.[8][9]

    _Gre._ Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the[8][10]
    collar.[8]                                                         5

    _Sam._ I strike quickly, being moved.

    _Gre._ But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

    _Sam._ A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

    _Gre._ To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand:[11]
    therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.[11]              10

    _Sam._ A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I[12][13]
    will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.[13]

    _Gre._ That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest[14]
    goes to the wall.

    _Sam._ 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker[15][16]   15
    vessels, are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push[16]
    Montague's men from the wall and thrust his maids to
    the wall.

    _Gre._ The quarrel is between our masters and us their[17]
    men.                                                              20

    _Sam._ 'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
    have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the maids;[18]
    I will cut off their heads.[19]

    _Gre._ The heads of the maids?[20]

    _Sam._ Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;[21]      25
    take it in what sense thou wilt.

    _Gre._ They must take it in sense that feel it.[22]

    _Sam._ Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and[23]
    'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.[23]

    _Gre._ 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou           30
    hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool; here comes two of[24]
    the house of Montagues.[25]

                    _Enter_ ABRAHAM _and_ BALTHASAR.

    _Sam._ My naked weapon is out: quarrel; I will back
    thee.

    _Gre._ How! turn thy back and run?[26]                            35

    _Sam._ Fear me not.

    _Gre._ No, marry; I fear thee![27]

    _Sam._ Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

    _Gre._ I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
    they list.                                                        40

    _Sam._ Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at
    them; which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.[28]

    _Abr._ Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

    _Sam._ I do bite my thumb, sir.

    _Abr._ Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?                         45

    _Sam._ [_Aside to Gre._] Is the law of our side, if I say ay?[29]

    _Gre._ No.

    _Sam._ No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but
    I bite my thumb, sir.

    _Gre._ Do you quarrel, sir?                                       50

    _Abr._ Quarrel, sir! no, sir.[30]

    _Sam._ But if you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good[31]
    a man as you.

    _Abr._ No better.[32]

    _Sam._ Well, sir.[33]                                             55

                           _Enter_ BENVOLIO.

    _Gre._ [_Aside to Sam._] Say 'better': here comes one of[34]
    my master's kinsmen.

    _Sam._ Yes, better, sir.[35]

    _Abr._ You lie.

    _Sam._ Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy                 60
    swashing blow.[36]                      [_They fight._

    _Ben._ Part, fools![37][38]      [_Beating down their weapons._
    Put up your swords; you know not what you do.[37]

                            _Enter_ TYBALT.

    _Tyb._ What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?[39]
    Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.[39]                     65

    _Ben._ I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
    Or manage it to part these men with me.

    _Tyb._ What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,[40]
    As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
    Have at thee, coward![41]                   [_They fight._        70

 _Enter several of both houses, who join the fray; then enter_ Citizens
                  _and_ Peace-officers, _with clubs_.

    _First Off._ Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down![42]
    Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues![43]

          _Enter old_ CAPULET _in his gown, and_ LADY CAPULET.

    _Cap._ What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

    _La. Cap._ A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?[44]

    _Cap._ My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,[45]                 75
    And flourishes his blade in spite of me.[46]

               _Enter old_ MONTAGUE _and_ LADY MONTAGUE.

    _Mon._ Thou villain Capulet!--Hold me not, let me go.[47]

    _La. Mon._ Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.[48]

               _Enter_ PRINCE ESCALUS, _with his train_.

    _Prin._ Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
    Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--[49]                  80
    Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
    That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
    With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
    On pain of torture, from those bloody hands[50]
    Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,[51]                 85
    And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
    Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,[52]
    By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
    Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
    And made Verona's ancient citizens[53]                            90
    Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,[54]
    To wield old partisans, in hands as old,[55]
    Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:[55][56]
    If ever you disturb our streets again,
    Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.                    95
    For this time, all the rest depart away:
    You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
    And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
    To know our farther pleasure in this case,[57]
    To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.                    100
    Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.[58]

                [_Exeunt all but Montague, Lady Montague, and Benvolio._

    _Mon._ Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?[59]
    Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

    _Ben._ Here were the servants of your adversary
    And yours close fighting ere I did approach:                     105
    I drew to part them: in the instant came
    The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared;
    Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
    He swung about his head, and cut the winds,[60]
    Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn:[61]               110
    While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,[62]
    Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
    Till the prince came, who parted either part.[63]

    _La. Mon._ O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?[64]
    Right glad I am he was not at this fray.[65]                     115

    _Ben._ Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
    Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
    A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad:[66]
    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore[67]
    That westward rooteth from the city's side,[68]                  120
    So early walking did I see your son:
    Towards him I made; but he was ware of me,
    And stole into the covert of the wood:
    I, measuring his affections by my own,
    Which then most sought where most might not be found,[69]        125
    Being one too many by my weary self,[70]
    Pursued my humour, not pursuing his,[71]
    And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.[72]

    _Mon._ Many a morning hath he there been seen,
    With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,[73]               130
    Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs:[74]
    But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
    Should in the farthest east begin to draw[75]
    The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
    Away from light steals home my heavy son,                        135
    And private in his chamber pens himself,
    Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
    And makes himself an artificial night:
    Black and portentous must this humour prove,[76]
    Unless good counsel may the cause remove.                        140

    _Ben._ My noble uncle, do you know the cause?[77]

    _Mon._ I neither know it nor can learn of him.

    _Ben._ Have you importuned him by any means?[78]

    _Mon._ Both by myself and many other friends:
    But he, his own affections' counsellor,[79]                      145
    Is to himself--I will not say how true--
    But to himself so secret and so close,
    So far from sounding and discovery,[80]
    As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
    Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,                   150
    Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.[81]
    Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
    We would as willingly give cure as know.[82]

                             _Enter_ ROMEO.

    _Ben._ See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
    I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.                      155

    _Mon._ I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
    To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.[83]

                                            [_Exeunt Montague and Lady._

    _Ben._ Good morrow, cousin.

    _Rom._                      Is the day so young?

    _Ben._ But new struck nine.

    _Rom._                       Ay me! sad hours seem long.[84]
    Was that my father that went hence so fast?[85]                  160

    _Ben._ It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

    _Rom._ Not having that which, having, makes them short.

    _Ben._ In love?[86]

    _Rom._ Out--[87]

    _Ben._ Of love?[88]                                              165

    _Rom._ Out of her favour, where I am in love.

    _Ben._ Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
    Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

    _Rom._ Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
    Should without eyes see pathways to his will![89]                170
    Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
    Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
    Here's much to do with hate, but more with love:
    Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
    O any thing, of nothing first create![90]                        175
    O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
    Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms![91]
    Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
    Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
    This love feel I, that feel no love in this.                     180
    Dost thou not laugh?

    _Ben._               No, coz, I rather weep.

    _Rom._ Good heart, at what?[92]

    _Ben._                      At thy good heart's oppression.

    _Rom._ Why, such is love's transgression.
    Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast;[93]
    Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest[94]                  185
    With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
    Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.[95]
    Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;[96]
    Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;[97]
    Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:[98]             190
    What is it else? a madness most discreet,
    A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
    Farewell, my coz.

    _Ben._            Soft! I will go along:[99]
    An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.[100]

    _Rom._   Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;[101]            195
    This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

    _Ben._   Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.[102]

    _Rom._   What, shall I groan and tell thee?[103]

    _Ben._                                      Groan! why, no;[103]
    But sadly tell me who.[104]

    _Rom._ Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:[105]             200
    Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill![106]
    In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

    _Ben._ I aim'd so near when I supposed you loved.

    _Rom._ A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.[107]

    _Ben._ A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.              205

    _Rom._ Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit[108]
    With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit,
    And in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
    From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.[109]
    She will not stay the siege of loving terms,                     210
    Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,[110]
    Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:[111]
    O, she is rich in beauty, only poor
    That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.[112]

    _Ben._ Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?      215

    _Rom._ She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;[113]
    For beauty, starved with her severity,[114]
    Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
    She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,[115]
    To merit bliss by making me despair:                             220
    She hath forsworn to love; and in that vow
    Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

    _Ben._ Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.

    _Rom._ O, teach me how I should forget to think.

    _Ben._ By giving liberty unto thine eyes;[116]                   225
    Examine other beauties.[117]

    _Rom._                  'Tis the way[117][118]
    To call hers, exquisite, in question more:[119]
    These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,[120]
    Being black, put us in mind they hide the fair;
    He that is strucken blind cannot forget[121]                     230
    The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
    Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
    What doth her beauty serve but as a note[122]
    Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?[123]
    Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.                     235

    _Ben._ I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.       [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _A street._[124]

              _Enter_ CAPULET, PARIS, _and_ Servant.[125]

    _Cap._ But Montague is bound as well as I,[126][127]
    In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,[127][128]
    For men so old as we to keep the peace.[129]

    _Par._ Of honourable reckoning are you both;
    And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.                           5
    But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

    _Cap._ But saying o'er what I have said before:
    My child is yet a stranger in the world;
    She hath not seen the change of fourteen years:
    Let two more summers wither in their pride                        10
    Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

    _Par._ Younger than she are happy mothers made.[130]

    _Cap._ And too soon marr'd are those so early made.[131]
    The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,[132]
    She is the hopeful lady of my earth:[133]                         15
    But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
    My will to her consent is but a part;
    An she agree, within her scope of choice[134]
    Lies my consent and fair according voice.[135]
    This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,                        20
    Whereto I have invited many a guest,
    Such as I love; and you among the store,
    One more, most welcome, makes my number more.[136]
    At my poor house look to behold this night
    Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:[137]            25
    Such comfort as do lusty young men feel[138]
    When well-apparell'd April on the heel
    Of limping winter treads, even such delight
    Among fresh female buds shall you this night[139]
    Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,                           30
    And like her most whose merit most shall be:
    Which on more view, of many mine being one[140]
    May stand in number, though in reckoning none.[141]
    Come, go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about
    Through fair Verona; find those persons out                       35
    Whose names are written there and to them say,[142]
    My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.[143]

                                            [_Exeunt Capulet and Paris._

    _Serv._ Find them out whose names are written here![144]
    It is written that the shoemaker should meddle with his[144]
    yard and the tailer with his last, the fisher with his pencil     40
    and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to find those
    persons whose names are here writ, and can never find[145]
    what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to[146]
    the learned. In good time.[146]

                     _Enter_ BENVOLIO _and_ ROMEO.

    _Ben._ Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,[147]       45
      One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;[148]
    Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;[149]
      One desperate grief cures with another's languish:[150]
    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,[151]
      And the rank poison of the old will die.                        50

    _Rom._ Your plantain-leaf is excellent for that.

    _Ben._ For what, I pray thee?

    _Rom._                        For your broken shin.

    _Ben._ Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

    _Rom._ Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
    Shut up in prison, kept without my food,                          55
    Whipt and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.[152]

    _Serv._ God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?[153]

    _Rom._ Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

    _Serv._ Perhaps you have learned it without book: but,[154][155]
    I pray, can you read any thing you see?[154]                      60

    _Rom._ Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

    _Serv._ Ye say honestly: rest you merry!

    _Rom._ Stay, fellow; I can read.[156]              [_Reads._

    'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters; County[157][158]
    Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady widow of[157][159]    65
    Vitruvio; Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio[157]
    and his brother Valentine; mine uncle Capulet, his wife,[157]
    and daughters; my fair niece Rosaline; Livia; Signior[157][160]
    Valentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively[157][161]
    Helena.'[157]                                                     70

    A fair assembly: whither should they come?[162]

    _Serv._ Up.[163]

    _Rom._ Whither?[164]

    _Serv._ To supper; to our house.[164][165]

    _Rom._ Whose house?                                               75

    _Serv._ My master's.

    _Rom._ Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.

    _Serv._ Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is
    the great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of
    Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine. Rest[166]        80
    you merry![167]                                      [_Exit._

    _Ben._ At this same ancient feast of Capulet's[168]
    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,[169]
    With all the admired beauties of Verona:
    Go thither, and with unattainted eye                              85
    Compare her face with some that I shall show,
    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.[170]

    _Rom._ When the devout religion of mine eye
      Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;[171]
    And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,[172]              90
      Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
    One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun[173]
    Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

    _Ben._ Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,[174]
    Herself poised with herself in either eye:                        95
    But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd[175]
    Your lady's love against some other maid[176]
    That I will show you shining at this feast,
    And she shall scant show well that now seems best.[177]

    _Rom._ I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,[178]            100
    But to rejoice in splendour of mine own.[179]        [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A room in Capulet's house._[180]

                 _Enter_ LADY CAPULET _and_ Nurse.[181]

    _La. Cap._ Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.[182]

    _Nurse._ Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,[183][184]
    I bade her come. What, lamb! what, lady-bird!--[183][185]
    God forbid!--Where's this girl? What, Juliet![183]

                            _Enter_ JULIET.

    _Jul._ How now! who calls?[186]                                    5

    _Nurse._ Your mother.[186]

    _Jul._ Madam, I am here. What is your will?[186][187]

    _La. Cap._ This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile,[182][188]
    We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;[188]
    I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.[188][189]          10
    Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.[188][190]

    _Nurse._ Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

    _La. Cap._ She's not fourteen.[182]

    _Nurse._                  I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--[191][192]
    And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,--[191][193]
    She is not fourteen. How long is it now[191][194]                 15
    To Lammas-tide?[191]

    _La. Cap._      A fortnight and odd days.[182][195][196]

    _Nurse._ Even or odd, of all days in the year,[195][197]
    Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.[195]
    Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--[195]
    Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;[195]                     20
    She was too good for me:--but, as I said,[195]
    On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;[195]
    That shall she, marry; I remember it well.[195][198]
    'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;[195]
    And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it--[195]               25
    Of all the days of the year, upon that day:[195][199]
    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,[195]
    Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;[195][196]
    My lord and you were then at Mantua:--[195]
    Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,[195]                     30
    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple[195]
    Of my dug, and felt it bitter, pretty fool,[195]
    To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug![195][200]
    Shake, quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,[195]
    To bid me trudge.[195]                                            35
    And since that time it is eleven years;[195][201]
    For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by the rood,[195][202]
    She could have run and waddled all about;[195]
    For even the day before, she broke her brow:[195]
    And then my husband,--God be with his soul![195][203]             40
    A' was a merry man--took up the child:[195]
    'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?[195]
    Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;[195]
    Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,[195][204]
    The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'[195]                45
    To see now how a jest shall come about![195]
    I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,[195][205]
    I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;[195][206]
    And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'[195]

    _La. Cap._ Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.[207]      50

    _Nurse._ Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,[208]
    To think it should leave crying, and say 'Ay:'[208]
    And yet, I warrant, it had upon it brow[208][209]
    A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;[208]
    A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly:[208][210]                55
    'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?[208]
    Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;[208]
    Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted, and said 'Ay.'[208][211]

    _Jul._ And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.[212]

    _Nurse._ Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace![213][214]  60
    Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:[213][215]
    An I might live to see thee married once,[213][216]
    I have my wish.[213]

    _La. Cap._ Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme[207][217]
    I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,[218]                 65
    How stands your disposition to be married?[219]

    _Jul._ It is an honour that I dream not of.[220][221]

    _Nurse._ An honour! were not I thine only nurse,[221][222][223]
    I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.[222][224]

    _La. Cap._ Well, think of marriage now; younger than you[207]     70
    Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,[225]
    Are made already mothers. By my count,[226]
    I was your mother much upon these years
    That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief;
    The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.                         75

    _Nurse._ A man, young lady! lady, such a man[227]
    As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.[227][228]

    _La. Cap._ Verona's summer hath not such a flower.[207]

    _Nurse._ Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.

    _La. Cap._ What say you? can you love the gentleman?[207][229]    80
    This night you shall behold him at our feast:[229]
    Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,[229][230]
    And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;[229]
    Examine every married lineament,[229][231]
    And see how one another lends content;[229]                       85
    And what obscured in this fair volume lies[229]
    Find written in the margent of his eyes.[229]
    This precious book of love, this unbound lover,[229]
    To beautify him, only lacks a cover:[229]
    The fish lives in the sea; and 'tis much pride[229][232]          90
    For fair without the fair within to hide:[229][233]
    That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,[229][234]
    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story:[229]
    So shall you share all that he doth possess,[229]
    By having him making yourself no less.[229]                       95

    _Nurse._ No less! nay, bigger: women grow by men.[229][235]

    _La. Cap._ Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?[207]

    _Jul._ I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
    But no more deep will I endart mine eye[236]
    Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.[237]            100

                         _Enter a_ Servingman.

    _Serv._ Madam, the guests are come, supper served up,
    you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
    the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must hence to
    wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

    _La. Cap._ We follow thee. [_Exit Servingman._] Juliet,[238]
    the county stays.[239][240]                                      105

    _Nurse._ Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.[239]

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _A street._

  _Enter_ ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, _with five or six other_ Maskers,
                       _and_ Torch-bearers.[241]

    _Rom._ What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?[242]
    Or shall we on without apology?

    _Ben._ The date is out of such prolixity:[243]
    We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
    Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,                            5
    Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;[244]
    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke[245][246]
    After the prompter, for our entrance:[245][247]
    But, let them measure us by what they will,
    We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.                        10

    _Rom._ Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
    Being but heavy, I will bear the light.[248]

    _Mer._ Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.[249]

    _Rom._ Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
    With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead[250]                     15
    So stakes me to the ground, I cannot move.

    _Mer._ You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,[251]
    And soar with them above a common bound.[251]

    _Rom._ I am too sore enpierced with his shaft[251][252]
    To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,[251][253]          20
    I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:[251]
    Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.[251][254]

    _Mer._ And, to sink in it, should you burthen love;[251][255]
    Too great oppression for a tender thing.[251]

    _Rom._ Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,[251]              25
    Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.[251][256]

    _Mer._ If love be rough with you, be rough with love;[251]
    Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.[251][257]
    Give me a case to put my visage in:[258]
    A visor for a visor! what care I[259]                             30
    What curious eye doth quote deformities?[260]
    Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

    _Ben._ Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in[261]
    But every man betake him to his legs.[261][262]

    _Rom._ A torch for me: let wantons light of heart                 35
    Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
    For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
    I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.[263]
    The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.[264][265]

    _Mer._ Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:[264]       40
    If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire[264][266]
    Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st[264][267]
    Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.[264][268]

    _Rom._ Nay, that's not so.[264]

    _Mer._                     I mean, sir, in delay[264][269]
    We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.[264][270]         45
    Take our good meaning, for our judgement sits[264][271]
    Five times in that ere once in our five wits.[264][272]

    _Rom._ And we mean well, in going to this mask;[264]
    But 'tis no wit to go.[264]

    _Mer._                 Why, may one ask?

    _Rom._ I dreamt a dream to-night.

    _Mer._                            And so did I.                   50

    _Rom._ Well, what was yours?

    _Mer._                       That dreamers often lie.

    _Rom._ In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.[273]

    _Mer._ O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.[274]
    She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes[275]
    In shape no bigger than an agate-stone[274][276]                  55
    On the fore-finger of an alderman,[274]
    Drawn with a team of little atomies[274][277]
    Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep:[274][278]
    Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs;[274][279]
    The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;[274]                     60
    Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;[274][280]
    Her collars, of the moonshine's watery beams;[274][281]
    Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;[274][282]
    Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,[274][283]
    Not half so big as a round little worm[274]                       65
    Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid:[274][284]
    Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,[274][285]
    Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,[274][285]
    Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.[274][285][286]
    And in this state she gallops night by night[274]                 70
    Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;[274]
    O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight;[274][287]
    O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;[274][288]
    O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,[274][289]
    Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,[274]               75
    Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:[274][290]
    Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,[274][291]
    And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;[274][292]
    And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail[274][293][294]
    Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,[274][295]             80
    Then he dreams of another benefice:[274][296]
    Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,[274][293]
    And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,[274]
    Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,[274]
    Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon[274][297]              85
    Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,[274][298]
    And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two,[274]
    And sleeps again. This is that very Mab[274]
    That plats the manes of horses in the night[274]
    And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,[274][299]         90
    Which once untangled much misfortune bodes:[274][300]
    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
    That presses them and learns them first to bear,
    Making them women of good carriage:
    This is she--

    _Rom._    Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace![301]                     95
    Thou talk'st of nothing.

    _Mer._              True, I talk of dreams;
    Which are the children of an idle brain,
    Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
    Which is as thin of substance as the air,
    And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes[302]                100
    Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
    And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
    Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.[303]

    _Ben._ This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves;
    Supper is done, and we shall come too late.                      105

    _Rom._ I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
    Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,[304]
    Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
    With this night's revels, and expire the term
    Of a despised life closed in my breast,[305]                     110
    By some vile forfeit of untimely death:
    But He, that hath the steerage of my course,[306][307]
    Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.[307][308]

    _Ben._ Strike, drum.[309]                          [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _A hall in Capulet's house._[310]

      Musicians _waiting. Enter_ Servingmen, _with napkins_.[311]

    _First Serv._ Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take[312][313]
    away? he shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher![313]

    _Sec. Serv._ When good manners shall lie all in one or[314][315][316]
    two men's hands, and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.[315]

    _First Serv._ Away with the joint-stools, remove the[312][317]     5
    court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a[318]
    piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let the porter[319]
    let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony, and Potpan![320]

    _Sec. Serv._ Ay, boy, ready.[321]

    _First Serv._ You are looked for and called for, asked[312][322]  10
    for and sought for, in the great chamber.

    _Third Serv._ We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly,[323][324]
    boys; be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.[324][325]

                                                  [_They retire behind._

 _Enter_ CAPULET, _with_ JULIET _and others of his house, meeting the_
                         Guests _and_ Maskers.

    _Cap._ Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes[326]
    Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you:[327]              15
    Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all[328]
    Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
    She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?[329]
    Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day[330]
    That I have worn a visor, and could tell                          20
    A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
    Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
    You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.[331][332]
    A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.[331][333]

                                         [_Music plays, and they dance._

    More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,[334]              25
    And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
    Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
    Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
    For you and I are past our dancing days:
    How long is't now since last yourself and I                       30
    Were in a mask?[335]

    _Sec. Cap._     By'r lady, thirty years.[336]

    _Cap._ What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
    'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,[337]
    Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
    Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.                   35

    _Sec. Cap._ 'Tis more, 'tis more: his son is elder, sir;
    His son is thirty.[338]

    _Cap._             Will you tell me that?[339]
    His son was but a ward two years ago.[340]

    _Rom._ [_To a Servingman_] What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
    Of yonder knight?                                                 40

    _Serv._ I know not, sir.[341]

    _Rom._ O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
    It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night[342]
    Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;[343]
    Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!                      45
    So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,[344]
    As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
    The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
    And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.[345]
    Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!                   50
    For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.[346]

    _Tyb._ This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
    Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave[347]
    Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,[348]
    To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?                              55
    Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
    To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.[349]

    _Cap._ Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?[350]

    _Tyb._ Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
    A villain, that is hither come in spite,                          60
    To scorn at our solemnity this night.

    _Cap._ Young Romeo is it?[351]

    _Tyb._                    'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

    _Cap._ Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
    He bears him like a portly gentleman;[352]
    And, to say truth, Verona brags of him                            65
    To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
    I would not for the wealth of all this town[353]
    Here in my house do him disparagement:
    Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
    It is my will, the which if thou respect,                         70
    Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
    An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

    _Tyb._ It fits, when such a villain is a guest:[354]
    I'll not endure him.

    _Cap._               He shall be endured:
    What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;[355]                   75
    Am I the master here, or you? go to.[355][356]
    You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,[355]
    You'll make a mutiny among my guests![355][357]
    You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man![355][358]

    _Tyb._ Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.[355]

    _Cap._                           Go to, go to;[355]               80
    You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?[355][359]
    This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:[355]
    You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.[360]
    Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:[360]
    Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame![361]             85
    I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!

    _Tyb._ Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
    Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
    I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,
    Now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.[362]    [_Exit._    90

    _Rom._ [_To Juliet_] If I profane with my unworthiest hand[363]
      This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this,[364]
    My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand[365]
      To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

    _Jul._ Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,[366]        95
      Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
    For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,[367]
      And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

    _Rom._ Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

    _Jul._   Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.         100

    _Rom._ O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
      They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

    _Jul._ Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.[368][369]

    _Rom._ Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.[368][370]
    Thus from my lips by thine my sin is purged.[368][371]           105

                                                         [_Kissing her._

    _Jul._   Then have my lips the sin that they have took.[368][372]

    _Rom._ Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged![368]
      Give me my sin again.[368][373]

    _Jul._                  You kiss by the book.

    _Nurse._ Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

    _Rom._ What is her mother?

    _Nurse._                   Marry, bachelor,[374]                 110
    Her mother is the lady of the house,
    And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous:
    I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
    I tell you, he that can lay hold of her[375]
    Shall have the chinks.

    _Rom._                 Is she a Capulet?[376]                    115
    O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.[377]

    _Ben._ Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

    _Rom._ Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.[378]

    _Cap._ Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
    We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.[379]                 120
    Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all;
    I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
    More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.[380]
    Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:[381]
    I'll to my rest.      [_Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse._[382]   125

    _Jul._ Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?[383]

    _Nurse._ The son and heir of old Tiberio.

    _Jul._ What's he that now is going out of door?[384]

    _Nurse._ Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.[385]

    _Jul._ What's he that follows there, that would not dance?[386]  130

    _Nurse._ I know not.

    _Jul._ Go, ask his name. If he be married,
    My grave is like to be my wedding bed.[387]

    _Nurse._ His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
    The only son of your great enemy.[388]                           135

    _Jul._ My only love sprung from my only hate!
    Too early seen unknown, and known too late![389]
    Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
    That I must love a loathed enemy.

    _Nurse._ What's this? what's this?[390]

    _Jul._                             A rhyme I learn'd even now[391]  140
    Of one I danced withal.                [_One calls within_ 'Juliet.'

    _Nurse._               Anon, anon!
    Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.[392]      [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[6] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. ScÃ¦na Prima. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

Verona. A public Place.] Capell. A Street in Verona. Rowe.

of the ... bucklers.] with ... bucklers, of ... Capulet. Qq Ff. See
note (1).

[7] _on_] Qq. _A_ F1 F2 F3. _a_ F4. _o'_ Capell.

[8] Sam. _I ... draw._ Gre. _Ay ... collar._] Omitted by Pope.

[9] _an_] Theobald. _and_ Qq. _if_ Ff.

[10] _out o' the_] _out o' th_ F1 F2. _out o' th'_ F3 F4. _out of_ Q2
Q3. _out of the_ Q4 Q5.

[11] _To ... away._] As prose first by Pope. Two lines, the first
ending _stand_: in Qq Ff.

[12] _A ... stand_:] Prose by Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[13] _I ... Montague's_] As prose in Q2. One line in the rest.

[14] _a weak slave_] _weake slave_ F2. _weak slave_ F3. _weak, slave_
F4.

[15] _'Tis true_] Q5. _Tis true_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _True_ Ff.

[16] _weaker vessels_] _weakest vessels_ F3 F4. _weakest_ Warburton.

[17] _us_] _not us_ Martley conj.

[18] _cruel_] _cruell_ Q4 Q5. _ciuil_ Q2. _ciuill_ Q3 F1. _civill_ F2.
_civil_ F3 F4.

[19] _I will cut_] Qq. _and cut_ Ff.

[20] _maids?_] Ff. _maids._ Q2 Q3. _maides._ Q4. _maids!_ Q5.

[21] _their_] _the_ Warburton, from (Q1).

[22] _in_] (Q1) Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. om. Q2 Q3 F1.

[23] _Me ... flesh_] Prose in Qq. Two lines, the first ending _stand_:
in Ff.

[24] _comes two of_] Malone, from (Q1). _comes of_ Qq Ff.

[25] _house of_] Qq. _house of the_ Ff.

Enter....] Rowe. Enter two other servingmen. Qq Ff. Transferred to
follow line 42 by Dyce.

[26] _run?_] _run._ F1 F2.

[27] _thee!_] Q5. _thee._ The rest.

[28] _a_] om. Q2.

[29] [Aside....] First marked by Capell.

_of_] _on_ Q5.

[30] _sir! no_,] _sir, no_ Qq. _sir? no_ Ff.

[31] _But if_] Qq. _If_ Ff.

[32] _better._] Qq. _better?_ Ff.

[33] Enter....] Transferred to line 61 by Dyce.

[34] [Aside....] First marked by Capell.

[35] _sir_] Qq. om. Ff.

[36] _swashing_] Q4 Q5. _washing_ Q2 Q3 Ff.

[37] _Part ... do._] As verse first by Capell. Prose in Qq Ff.

[38] [Beating ... weapons.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[39] _What ... death._] Divided as in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[40] _drawn_] _drawne_ Qq. _draw_ Ff.

[41] _thee_] _the_ Q3 F2.

[They fight.] Fight. Ff. om. Qq.

Enter....] Capell, substantially. Enter three or foure Citizens with
Clubs or partysons. Qq (partisans Q5). Enter three or foure Citizens
with Clubs. Ff.

[42] First Off.] Offi. Qq Ff. Cit. Steevens. 1 Cit. Malone.

_Down...._] Citizens. _Down...._ Edd. conj.

[43] and Lady Capulet.] Rowe. and his wife. Qq Ff.

[44] La. Cap.] Rowe. Wife. Qq Ff.

_crutch_ (bis)] Ff Q5. _crowch_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[45] _My sword_] _A sword_ F4.

[46] and Lady Montague.] Rowe. and his wife. Qq Ff.

[47] _Capulet!--Hold_] _Capulet. Hold_ Ff. _Capulet, hold_ Q2 Q3 Q4.
_Capulet: hold_ Q5.

_let me go_] _let go_ S. Walker conj.

[48] La. Mon.] Rowe. M. Wife. 2. Qq. 2. Wife. Ff.

_one_] Qq. _a_ Ff.

Escalus,] Edd. Eskales, Qq Ff.

[49] _steel,--_] _steel--_ Rowe. _steele_, or _steel_, Qq Ff.

[50] _torture, from ... hands_] _torture from those bloudie hands,_
Q2 Q3 F4 (_bloudy_ Q3. _bloody_ F4). _torture, from those bloody
hands,_ Q4.

_those_] _these_ F2 F3 F4.

[51] _mistemper'd_] Ff Q5. _mistempered_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[52] _brawls_] _brawles_ Qq. _broyles_ Ff.

_airy_] _angry_ Collier MS.

[53] _made_] _make_ F2.

_Verona's_] _Neronas_ Q2.

[54] _grave beseeming_] _grave-beseeming_ S. Walker conj.

_ornaments_] _ornament_ F2 F3.

[55] _To wield ... hate_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[56] _Canker'd ... hate_] Omitted by Hanmer.

_part your_] _party our_ Q4.

[57] _farther_] Q2 Q4. _further_ Q5. _Fathers_ Q3 F1 F2 F3. _Father's_
F4.

[58] [Exeunt....] Exeunt. Qq Ff. Exeunt Prince and Capulet. &c. Rowe.

[59] SCENE II. Pope.

Mon.] Qq Ff. M. wife. (Q1). La. Moun. Rowe.

[60] _swung_] _swoong_ Q2. _swong_ The rest.

[61] _Who ... scorn_] Omitted by Pope.

_hiss'd_] _kiss'd_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[62] _thrusts_] _thrust_ Q4.

[63] _who ... part_] Omitted by Pope.

[64] La. Mon.] Rowe. Wife Qq Ff.

_saw ... to-day?_] Omitted by Pope.

[65] _I am_] Q2. _am I_ The rest.

[66] _drave_] _drive_ Q2.

_drave ... abroad_] _drew me from company_ (Q1) Pope. _drew me to
walk abroad_ Theobald. _drew me from canopy_ Warburton conj.
(withdrawn).

[67] _sycamore_] Q5. _syramour_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _sycamour_ Ff.

[68] _the city's_] Malone, from (Q1). _this citie_ Q2. _this city_
The rest. _the city_ Warburton. _this city_ Capell. _the city'_
Steevens.

[69] _Which ... found_] Q5. _Which ... sought, where ... found_ The
rest. _That most are busied, when they're most alone_ Pope, from (Q1).

[70] _Being ... self_] Omitted in (Q1) Pope.

[71] _humour_] Q4 Q5. _humor_ Q2. _honour_ The rest.

_his_] _him_ Theobald (Thirlby conj.).

[72] _shunn'd_] Ff Q5. _shunned_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

_who_] _what_ Seymour conj.

[73] _morning's_] _mornings_ Qq F1 F2. _morning_ F3 F4.

[74] _Adding ... sighs_] Omitted by Pope.

[75] _Should_] _Does_ Seymour conj.

[76] _portentous_] F2 F3 F4. _portendous_ Q2 Q3 F1 Q5. _protendous_ Q4.

[77] _learn_] _learn it_ Rowe.

[78] _other_] _others_ F1.

[79] _his_] _is_ Q2.

[80] _discovery_,] After this Johnson conjectures that some lines are
lost.

[81] _sun_] Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _same_ Qq Ff.

[82] Enter Romeo.] Qq Ff. Enter Romeo, at a distance. Capell.
Transferred by Dyce to follow line 157.

[83] [Exeunt ...] Capell. Exeunt. Qq Ff.

[84] _struck_] Rowe. _strooke_ Qq F1 F2. _strook_ F3 F4.

_Ay_] _Ah_ Rowe.

[85] _hence_] _henec_ F1.

[86] _In love?_] Q5. _In love._ The rest.

[87] _Out_--] Rowe. _Out._ Qq Ff.

[88] _Of love?_] Q5. _Of love._ The rest.

[89] _see ... will_] _set pathways to our will_ Staunton conj.

_will_] _ill_ Hanmer.

[90] _create_] (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _created_ The rest.

[91] _well-seeming_] _welseeing_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[92] _Why, such is_] _Why such is, merely_, Seymour conj. _Why such,
Benvolio, is_ Collier (Collier MS.). _Why, such, Benvolio, such is_
Mommsen conj. _Why, gentle cousin, such is_ Keightley.]

_Why ... transgression_] Omitted by Pope.

[93] _mine_] _my_ Q4 Q5.

[94] _if_] _them_ (Q1) Pope.

[95] _to too_] _too too_ Q2.

[96] _raised_] _rais'd_ Pope, from (Q1). _made_ Qq Ff.

[97] _purged_] _urg'd_ Singer, ed. 1, (Johnson conj). _puff'd_ Collier.
(Collier MS.).

_sparkling_] _sparling_ F4.

[98] Before or after this line Johnson conjectured that a line is
omitted.

_lovers'_] _lovers_ (Q1) Pope. _loving_ Qq Ff.

After this Keightley marks a line omitted.

[99] _coz_] _cousin_ Pope. _Cox_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_I will_] _I'll_ Pope.

[100] _An_] Hanmer. _And_ Qq Ff.

[101] _Tut_] _But_ F3 F4.

[102] _who is that_] _who she is_ Pope. _whom she is_ (Q1) Boswell.

[103] _Groan ... who_] As in Hanmer. One line in Qq Ff.

[104] _But ... who_] _But pry'thee tell me sadly who she is_ Seymour
conj. _But sadly tell me, truly tell me who_ or _But sadly tell me,
gentle cousin, who_ Taylor conj. MS. _But ... who she is you love_
Keightley.

[105] _Bid ... make_] (Q1) Q4 Q5. _A sicke man in sadnesse makes_ Q2
Q3 F1. _A sicke man in good sadnesse makes_ F2 F3 F4.

[106] _Ah, word_] (Q1) Malone. _A word_ Qq F1. _O. word_ F2 F3 F4.

[107] _mark-man_] _marks-man_ F3 F4.

[108] _Well_] Qq Ff. _But_ (Q1) Pope.

[109] _From ... unharm'd_] _'Gainst ... encharm'd_ Grant White conj.

_unharm'd_] (Q1) Pope. _uncharmd_ Qq Ff. _encharm'd_ Collier (Collier
MS.).

[110] _bide_] Qq F3 F4. _bid_ F1 F2.

[111] _ope_] _open_ F1.

_saint-seducing_] _saint-seucing_ F2.

[112] _she_] om. Q4.

_with ... store_] _with her dies beauty's store_ Theobald. _with her
dies beauty store_ Keightley.

[113] _makes_] _make_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[114] _starved_] _starv'd_ F4. _sterv'd_ The rest.

[115] _is too_] _is to_ Q4.

_wise, wisely too_] Qq F3 F4. _wisewi: sely too_ F1. _wise wisely too_
F2. _wise; too wisely_ Hanmer.

[116] Ben.] Q2 Q5 Ff. Ro. Q3 Q4.

[117] _'Tis ... more_] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[118] _in question_] _to question_ Keightley.

[119] _These_] _Those_ F3 F4.

[120] _put_] Q5 F3 F4. _puts_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2.

[121] _strucken_] Q5 F3 F4. _strooken_ The rest.

[122] _What_] _How_ Seymour conj.

_serve but as_] _serve for, but_ Seymour conj.

[123] _fair?_] Pope. _faire._ or _fair._ Qq Ff.

[124] SCENE II.] Capell. SCENE III. Pope.

A street.] Capell.

[125] Enter ...] Enter Capulet, Countie Paris, and the Clowne. Qq Ff.

[126] _But_] Q2. om. Q3 Ff. _And_ Q4 Q5.

[127] _I, In penalty alike_] _I, alike In penalty_ S. Walker conj.

[128] _I think_,] om. Pope.

[129] _as we_] om. Taylor conj. MS., reading _I think ... peace_, as
one line.

[130] _happy_] _married_ Seymour conj.

[131] _made_] _married_ (Q1) Singer (ed. 2).

[132] _The earth_] Q4 Q5. _Earth_ Q2 Q3 F1. _Earth up_ F2 F3 F4.

_The earth hath swallow'd_] _Earth hath up-swallow'd_ Seymour conj.

_swallow'd_] Q5. _swallowed_ The rest.

_she_] _her_ Hanmer.

[133] _She is ... earth_] Omitted by (Q1) Pope. _She is the hope and
stay of my full years_ Johnson conj.

_She is_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _Shees_ Q2 Q3. _Shee's_ F1.

_earth_] _fee_ Keightley.

[134] _An_] Capell. _And_ Qq Ff. _If_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_agree_] _agreed_ Q2.

[135] _fair according_] _fair-according_ Nicholson conj.

[136] _One_] _Once_ Rowe.

_most welcome_] _o' th' welcome_ Hanmer.

_makes_] _make_ Capell conj.

[137] _make ... heaven light_] _make ... heaven's light_ Theobald.
_make ... even light_ Warburton. _mask ... heaven's light_ Jackson
conj.

[138] _young men_] _yeomen_ Johnson conj.

[139] _female_] (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _fennell_ Qq F1.

[140] _Which on more_] Q4 Q5. _Which one more_ Q2 Q3 Ff. _Such
amongst_ (Q1) Steevens. _Within your_ Johnson conj. _On which more_
Capell. _Search among_ Steevens conj. _Whilst on more_ Dyce, ed. 2
(Mason conj.). _Which one, o'er_ Jackson conj.

_Which ... view, of_] _Such, amongst few; of_ Badham conj. _Which
one may vie with_ Bullock conj. _Which one more, few or_ Id. conj.
(withdrawn).

_view, of many_] _view, of many,_ Q2 F2 F3 F4. _veiw, of many_, Q3
F1. _view of many_, Q4 Q5.

[141] _May_] _My_ F2.

[142] [Gives a paper. Malone.

[143] [Exeunt ...] Rowe. Exit. Qq Ff.

[144] _written here! It_] _written here? It_ Rowe. _written. Here it_
Qq F3 F4. _written. Heere it_ F1. _written. Heert it_ F2. _written
here!_ [turns and twists the notes about.] _Here_ [tapping his head]
_it_ Nicholson conj.

[145] _persons_] _persons out_ Capell.

_here writ_] Q2 Q3 Q5. _heee writ_ Q4. _writ_ Ff.

[146] _I ... learned_] Put in parenthesis in Qq Ff.

[147] _out_] _out_, Q2.

[148] _One_] _On_ Q2.

[149] _holp_] _help'd_ Pope.

[150] _desperate_] _desparate_ F1 F2.

_cures_] _cure_ Pope.

[151] _thy eye_] Q2. _the eye_ The rest.

[152] _and--God-den_] _and--Good-e'en_ Rowe. _and Godden_ Qq F1 F2 F3.
_and Good-e'en_ F4.

[153] _God gi' god-den_] _Godgigoden_ Qq F1 F2 F3. _God gi' Good-e'en_
F4.

[154] _Perhaps ... see?_] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Qq Ff.

[155] _learned_] Qq. _learn'd_ Ff.

[156] [Reads.] He reades the Letter. Qq Ff. He reads the list. Johnson.

[157] _Signior ... Helena._] As nine lines of verse, Dyce, ed. 2
(Capell conj.).

[158] _daughters_] Qq. _daughter_ Ff.

_County_] _Count_ Rowe.

[159] _Anselme_] Qq F1 F2. _Anselm_ F3 F4. _Anselmo_ Dyce, ed. 2
(Capell conj.).

[160] _Livia_] _Livio_ Rowe (ed. 2). _gentle Livia_ Capell conj. _and
Livia_ Dyce, ed. 2 (Courtenay conj.).

[161] _lively_] _lovely_ Rowe.

[162] [giving back the Note. Capell.

[163] _Up_] _To sup_ Staunton conj.

[164] _Whither?_ Serv. _To ... supper; to_] Theobald (Warburton).
_Whether to supper?_ Ser: _To_ (Q1). _Whither to supper?_ Ser. _To_ Q2.
_Whither to supper._ Ser.? _To_ Q3. _Whither to supper._ Ser. _To_
Q4. _Whither? to supper?_ Ser. _To_ Ff Q5.

[165] _To supper_] om. Capell.

[166] _crush_] _crash_ Hanmer.

[167] [Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[168] _Capulet's_] _Cupalets_ F2.

[169] _lovest_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _loves_ (Q1) Q2 Q3 Q4 F1.

[170] _thee_] _the_ Q5.

[171] _fires_] Pope. _fire_ (Q1) Qq Ff.

[172] _these_] _those_ Hanmer.

[173] _love!_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _love_, (Q1) Q2. _love?_ Q3 Q4. _love_: F1.

[174] _Tut_] Qq F1. _Tut Tut_ F2. _Tut, tut_ F2 F3 F4.

[175] _that_] _those_ Rowe.

_scales_] _scale_ S. Walker conj. (withdrawn).

[176] _lady's love_] _lady-love_ Theobald. _lady and love_ Keightley.

[177] _she shall scant show well_] (Q1) Qq. _she shew scant shell,
well_, F1. _shele shew scant, well_, F2. _she'l shew scant well,_ F3
F4. _she will shew scant well,_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_seems_] _seemes_ (Q1) Q2. _shewes_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2 Q5. _shews_ F3 F4.

[178] _sight_] _light_ Anon. conj.

[179] [Exeunt.] Pope (ed. 2). om. Qq Ff.

[180] SCENE III.] Capell. SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE IV. Pope.

A room ...] Capell. Capulet's House. Rowe.

[181] Lady Capulet] Rowe. Capulets Wife. Qq Ff.

[182] La. Cap.] Rowe. Wife. Qq Ff.

[183] _Now ... Juliet!_] As verse first by Johnson. Prose in Qq Ff. The
Nurse's speeches are printed in italics in Qq.

[184] _year_] _yeeres_ Q5. _years_ F4.

[185] _bade her come_,] _bad her come_, Q1 Q2 Q3 Ff. _had her, come_,
Q4. _had her: come,_ Q5.

[186] _How ... will?_] As in Qq Ff. Two lines, the first ending _here_,
in Capell.

[187] _What is your will?_] om. Seymour conj.

[188] _This ... age._] As verse first by Capell. Prose in Qq Ff.

[189] _thou's_] _thou'se_ Qq Ff. _thous'_ Rowe. _thou shalt_ Pope.

_our_] _my_ F4.

[190] _know'st_] Q5. _knowest_ The rest.

[191] _I'll ... Lammas-tide?_] Arranged as in Steevens (1793).
_I'll ... fourteen_ as prose, _How ... tide?_ as one line, in Qq. Four
lines, ending _teeth, ... spoken, ... fourteen, Lammas-tide?_ in Ff.
Three lines, ending _teeth, ... four, ... Lammas-tide?_ in Capell.

[192] _of my_] _o' my_ Capell.

[193] _teen_] _teeth_ F2 F3 F4.

[194] _She is_] Steevens (1793). _Shees_ or _Shee's_ or _She's_ Qq Ff.

_is it_] _is't_ Capell.

[195] _Even ... 'Ay.'_] As verse first by Capell. Prose in Qq Ff.

[196] _in_] _i'_ Capell.

[197] _shall_] _stal_ Q2.

[198] _That_] _then_ Q4 Q5.

[199] _of the year_] _in the year_ Q5 F3 F4.

[200] _with_] _wi'_ Capell.

[201] _eleven_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _a leauen_ (Q1). _a leuen_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _a
eleuen_ F1.

_years_] _yeare_ (Q1).

[202] _she could_] _could Iuliet_ (Q1).

_high-lone_] _high lone_ (Q1). _hylone_ Q2. _a lone_ Q3. _alone_ The
rest.

_by the_] (Q1). _byth_ Q2. _bi'th_ Q3 Q4. _bi' th'_ F1 F2 F3. _byth'_
Q5 F1.

[203] _with_] om. Rowe (ed. 1).

[204] _Jule_] _Juliet_ (Q1) F4. _Julet_ F2 F3. _JulÃ©_ Hanmer. _Juli'_
Capell.

[205] _an_] Pope. _and_ Qq F3 F4. & F1 F2. _if_ (Q1).

_should_] (Q1) F3 F4. _shall_ The rest.

[206] _Jule_] _Julet_ F1 F2 F3. _Juliet_ F4. _JulÃ©_ Hanmer.

[207] La. Cap.] Rowe. Old La. Qq Ff.

[208] _Yes, ... 'Ay.'_] As verse first by Capell. Prose in Qq Ff.

[209] _upon_] _on_ Q5.

_it_] Qq F1 F2. _its_ F3 F4.

[210] _perilous_] _par'lous_ Capell.

[211] _Jule_] _Julet_ F2 F3. _Juliet_ F4. _JulÃ©_, Hanmer. _Juli'_
Capell.

[212] _stint thou_] _stent thou_ F3. _stint thee_ F4.

_thee_,] _the_ F2.

[213] _Peace ... wish._] As verse first by Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[214] _to_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _too_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1.

[215] _wast_] _wert_ (Q1). _was_ F2.

[216] _An_] Pope. _and_ Qq Ff.

[217] _Marry, that 'marry'_] _And that same marriage_ Pope, from (Q1).

[218] _Juliet_] _Julet_ F2 F3.

[219] _disposition_] Ff. _dispositions_ Qq.

[220] _It is_] _'Tis_ F3 F4.

[221] _honour_] Pope, from (Q1). _houre_ Qq F1 F2. _hour_ F3 F4.

[222] _An ... teat._] As verse first by Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[223] _thine_] om. Q4 Q5.

[224] _I would say_] _I would say that_ F3 F4. _I'd say_ Pope.

_wisdom_] _thy wisdome_ Q4 Q5.

[225] _Verona_] _Varona_ F2.

[226] _mothers. By_] Ff. _mothers by_ Qq.

[227] _A man ... wax._] As verse first in Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[228] _world--_] F4. _world._ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2 F3. _world_, (Q1) Q5.

[229] La. Cap. _What ... men._] Omitted by Pope, following (Q1).

[230] _Paris'_] _Paris's_ F4.

[231] _married_] Q2. _severall_ The rest.

[232] _sea_] _shell_ Rann (Mason conj.).

[233] _fair within_] _faire, within_ Q2.

[234] _many's_] _many_ Q5.

[235] _bigger: women_] Ff. _bigger women_ Qq.

[236] _endart_] _engage_ (Q1). _ingage_ Pope.

[237] _it_] (Q1) Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. om. Q2 Q3 F1.

Enter a Servingman.] Ff. Enter Serving. Qq. Enter Clowne. (Q1).

[238] _straight_] om. Pope.

[239] La. Cap. _We ... days._] Omitted by Pope.

[240] La. Cap.] Rowe. Mo. Qq Ff.

[Exit Servingman.] Exit. Ff, after line 105. om. Qq.

[241] SCENE IV.] Steevens. SCENE V. Pope. ACT II. SCENE I. Capell.

A street.] Capell. A street before Capulet's house. Theobald.

Mercutio,] Mercurio, Q4.

and] om. Qq Ff.

Torch-bearers.] Torchbearers, and drums. Theobald. Torch-bearers, and
Drummers. Hanmer. Torchbearers, and others. Steevens.

[242] Rom.] Ben. Capell conj.

[243] Ben.] Mer. Capell conj.

[244] _crow-keeper_] _cow-keeper_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald conj.
withdrawn).

[245] _Nor no ... entrance_:] Inserted by Pope from (Q1). Omitted in Qq
Ff.

[246] _Nor no_] (Q1). _Nor a_ Pope.

[247] _for_] _'fore_ Hanmer.

_entrance_] (Q1). _enterance_ Pope.

[248] _Being ... light._] Omitted by Pope.

[249] Mer.] Ben. Capell conj.

[250] _soul_] _soule_ Qq. _soale_ F1. _sole_ F2 F3 F4.

[251] Mer. _You ... love down._] Omitted by (Q1) Pope.

[252] _enpierced_] _enpearced_ Qq F1. _impearced_ F2 F3. _impierced_
F4. _empierced_ S. Walker conj.

[253] _so bound_,] Q2 Q3 Q4. _to bound_: F1 F4. _to bond_: F2 F3. _so
bound._ Q5.

[254] _burthen_] _birthen_ Q2.

[255] Mer.] Q5. Mercu. Q4. Horatio. Q Q3. Hora. Ff.

_should you_] _you should_ Capell conj.

_love_;] _love?_ Steevens, 1773 (Heath conj.).

[256] _and_] om. F3 F4.

[257] _beat love_] _love beat_ Rowe.

[258] _Give ..._] Mer. _Give ..._ (Q1) Pope.

_in_:] _in?_ [Pulling off his Mask. Theobald. _in?_ [Putting on his
Mask. Johnson. _in._ [taking one from an Att. Capell.

[259] _visor!_] _visor!_ [throwing it away. Capell.

[260] _quote_] _coate_ (Q1). _cote_ Q2.

[261] Ben. _Come ... legs._] Omitted by (Q1) Pope.

[262] _betake_] _betakes_ Q3.

[263] _candle-holder_] _candle lighter_ Rowe.

[264] _The game ... ask?_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[265] _done_] (Q1) F1 F2 F3. _dum_ Q2. _dun_ Q3 Q4 Q5 F4.

[266] _mire_] _mire._ Ff.

[267] _Of this sir-reverence love_] Singer, from (Q1). _Or save you
reverence love_ Qq. _Or save your reverence love_ F1 F2 F3. _Or, save
your reverence, love_ F4. _O! save your reverence, love_ Johnson
conj. _Of this (save reverence) love_ Malone and Rann. _Of this
(sir-reverence) love_ Dyce (ed. 1).

_stick'st_] Capell. _stickst_ (Q1). _stickest_ The rest.

[268] _the_] _thine_ Theobald.

[269] _Nay_] om. Q4 Q5.

_sir, in delay_] _sir in delay_ Q2 Q3. _sir in delay_, (Q1) Q4 Q5.
_sir I delay,_ F1. _sir I, delay_, F2. _sir I, delay._ F3. _sir, I
delay._ F4. _sir, we delay._ Rowe.

[270] _We ... day_] Capell. _We burne our lights by night, like
Lampes by day_ (Q1). _We waste our lights in vaine, lights lights
by day_ Qq (_wast_ Q3). _We wast our lights in vaine, lights,
lights, by day_ Ff. _We burn our lights by light, and lamps by day_
Theobald. _We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day_ Johnson.
_We waste our lights in vain, light lights by day_ Nicholson conj.

[271] _sits_] _fits_ Rowe. _hits_ Collier MS.

[272] _our five_] Malone (Wilbraham conj.). _our fine_ Qq Ff.

[273] After this line Keightley inserts from (Q1), Ben. _Queen Mab!
what's she?_

[274] _fairies'_] Steevens. _fairies_ (Q1). _Fairies_ Q2 Q3 Q5 Ff
(_Fayries_ F3). _Fairis_ Q4. _Fancy's_ Theobald (Warburton). _fairy_
Warton conj.

[275] _She is ... bodes_:] As verse by Pope, following (Q1). Prose in
Qq Ff.

[276] _In shape no_] _In shade; no_ Warburton conj.

_an_] om. F1 F2.

[277] _atomies_] Q3 Q4 Ff Q5. _Atomi_ (Q1). _ottamie_ Q2.

[278] _Athwart_] (Q1) Pope. _over_ Qq Ff.

[279] _made of long_] _are made of_ (Q1) Seymour conj.

[280] _Her traces_] Qq F1. _her trace_ F3 F4. _The traces_ (Q1) Pope.

_spider's_] _spider_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[281] _Her collar_] _The collars_ (Q1) Pope.

_collars_] _coullers_ F1.

[282] _film_] _filme_ F2 F3 F4. _Philome_ Qq F1. _filmes_ (Q1).

[283] _waggoner_,] _waggoner's_ Seymour conj.

[284] _Prick'd_] _Pickt_ (Q1). _Pick'd_ Collier MS.

_lazy finger_] _Lazie-finger_ F1. _Lazy finger_ F2 F3.

_maid_] (Q1) Pope. _man_ Qq F1. _woman_ F2 F3 F4. _milkmaid_ Collier MS.

[285] _Her ... coachmakers_] Transferred to follow line 58, Lettsom
conj.

[286] _o' mind_] Capell. _amind_ Q2. _a mind_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _of mind_ Q5
F3 F4.

[287] _O'er_] Hanmer. _O're_ (Q1). _On_ Qq Ff.

_O'er ... straight_;] om. Seymour conj.

_courtiers_'] _Countries_ F2 F3 F4. _counties_' Tyrwhitt conj.

_court'sies_] _cursies_ Qq Ff.

[288] _dream_] _dreamt_ F1.

[289] _on_] _one_ Q2.

[290] _breaths_] Rowe. _breathes_ (Q1). _breath_ Qq Ff.

[291] _Sometime_] _sometimes_ Q5.

_courtier's_] _lawyer's_ Pope, from (Q1). _taylor's_ Theobald conj.
_counsellor's_ Collier MS.

_courtier's nose_] _lawyer's lip_ Seymour conj.

[292] _dreams_] _dreame_ Q3.

[293] _sometime_] _sometimes_ Rowe.

[294] _a_] om. F1.

[295] _a parson's nose_] _a parson_ Pope (ed. 1). _the parson_ Pope
(ed. 2).

_parson's_] _Persons_ Q2.

_a'_] Capell. _a_ Qq F1. _he_ F2 F3 F4.

[296] _he dreams_] _dreams he_ (Q1) Pope.

[297] _Of healths_] _Of delves_ Thirlby conj. _Trenches_ Keightley conj.

[298] _ear_] _eare_ (Q1)Qq. _eares_ F1 F2 F3. _ears_ F4.

[299] _bakes_] _cakes_ Pope. _makes_ Collier MS.

_elf-locks_] _Elklocks_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[300] _untangled_] _entangled_ F3. _intangled_ F4.

_misfortune_] _misfortunes_ Rowe.

[301] _This_] _This, this_ Hanmer. _And this_ Capell.

_she--_] F2 F3 F4. _she._ Q2 Q3 F1. _shee._ Q4 Q5. _she that ..._
Keightley.

[302] _inconstant_] _unconstant_ Q5 F3 F4.

[303] _his face_] (Q1) Pope. _his side_ Qq Ff. _his tide_ Collier MS.
_aside_ Anon. conj.

[304] _yet_] _is_ (Q1). _still_ Rowe.

[305] _breast_] _breath_ Collier MS.

[306] _steerage_] (Q1) Q5 F4. _stirrage_ The rest.

[307] _course ... sail_] _fate ... course_ Capell conj.

[308] _sail_] (Q1) Steevens. _sute_ Qq Ff. _fate_ Anon. conj.

[309] [Exeunt.] Drum. Exeunt. Capell. They march about the Stage, and
Exeunt. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[310] SCENE V.] Steevens. SCENE VI. Hanmer. Pope continues the scene.
ACT II. SCENE II. Capell.

A hall ...] Theobald. Musicians waiting.] Capell.

[311] Enter ...] They march about the Stage, and Servingmen come forth
with Napkins. Enter Romeo. Qq. They march ... their napkins. Enter
Servant. Ff.

[312] First Serv.] 1 Ser. Rowe. Ser. Qq Ff.

[313] _Where's ... trencher!_] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Qq Ff.

[314] Sec. Serv.] 2 Ser. Rowe. 1. Qq Ff.

[315] _When ... thing._] Two lines in Q2. Prose in the rest.

[316] _lie_] _ye_ Rowe (ed. 1).

_all_] Qq. om. Ff.

[317] _joint-stools_] Rowe. _ioynstooles_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2.
_join-stooles_ Q5. _joynstooles_ F3. _joyn-stools_ F4.

[318] _court-cupboard_] Q5 F4. _court-cubbert_ Q2 Q3 Q4.
_court-cubbord_ F1 F2 F3.

[319] _lovest_] Ff. _loves_ Qq.

[320] _Nell._] Theobald. _Nell_, Qq Ff.

_Antony_] _Authonie_ F2.

_Antony, and Potpan!_] _Antony! Potpan!_ Capell. _Antony Potpan!_
Dyce (ed. 2).

[321] Sec. Serv.] 2 Ser. Rowe. 2. Qq Ff. 3. S. Capell (corrected in
MS.).

[322] _and_] om. F3 F4.

[323] Third Serv.] 3. Qq. 1. Ff. 2 Ser. Rowe.

[324] _We ... all._] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Qq Ff.

[325] [They retire behind.] Malone. Exeunt. Qq Ff. om. Capell.

Enter ...] Enter all the guests and gentlewomen to the Maskers. Qq Ff.

[326] SCENE VI. Pope. SCENE VII. Hanmer.

_Welcome, gentlemen_] _Gentlemen, welcome_ Hanmer. _You're welcome,
gentlemen_ Lettsom conj.

_Welcome ... toes_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_their toes_] _your feet_ Pope.

[327] _will have a bout_] Capell. _will have about_ (Q1). _will walke
about_ Qq Ff. _we'll have a bout_ Pope.

[328] _Ah ha, my_] (Q1) Capell. _Ah my_ Qq F1. _Ah me_, F2 F3 F4. _Ah
me, my_ Rowe.

[329] _She_,] om. Pope. Transferred to the end of line 17 by Steevens.

[330] _Welcome_] _You're welcome_ Lettsom conj.

_gentlemen_] _all gentlemen_ Pope. _you too, gentlemen_ Capell.

[Enter other guests. Nicholson conj.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[331] _You are ... girls_] Omitted by Pope.

[332] _gentlemen! Come_,] _gentlemen come,_ Q2.

[Enter more guests. Nicholson conj.

[333] _A hall, a hall!_] _A ball, a ball._ Johnson.

_a hall_] _hall_ F2 F3 F4.

[Music ...] Qq Ff (after line 23). Musick. Dance forming. Capell (after
line 23).

[334] _you_] _ye_ F2 F3 F4.

[335] _mask_] _make_ Q5.

_By'r lady_] F4. _Berlady_ The rest.

[336] Cap.] Capell. I. Capu. Qq. Ff.

[337] _Lucentio_,] (Q1) F1 F3 F4. _Lucientio_: Q2 Q5. _Lucientio_, Q3
Q4. _Lucentio._ F2.

[338] Cap.] 1 Capu. Qq. 3 Cap. Ff.

[339] _two_] 2. Q2. _three_ (Q1).

[Juliet is taken out. Capell. After this line Keightley inserts from
(Q1), _Good youths, i' faith! Oh, youth's a jolly thing!_

[340] [To a Servingman.] to a Servant. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

_lady's_] _ladies_ Q2. _ladie is_ Q3 Q4 F1. _lady is_ F2 Q5 F3 F4.

[341] [Company dance. Capell.

[342] _It seems she_] (Q1) Qq F1. _Her beauty_ F2 F3 F4.

[343] _Like_] (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _As_ Qq F1.

[344] _snowy_] _snowe_ Q4.

[345] _blessed_] _happy_ (Q1) Pope.

[346] _For I ne'er_] _For I nere_ Qq (_ne're_ Q5). _For I never_ Ff. _I
never_ (Q1) Pope.

[347] _What dares_] _what? dares_ Q5.

[348] _hither_] _hether_ Q3 Q4.

_antic_] _antick_ Rowe. _antique_ Qq Ff.

[349] _it_] _in_ F2.

[350] _Why ... so?_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[351] _Romeo is it?_] Ff. _Romeo is it._ Q2 Q3 Q4. _Romeo, is it?_
Q5. _Romeo, is't?_ Pope.

_'Tis he_] om. Pope.

_villain_] _villian_ F2.

[352] _He_] (Q1) Rowe. _A_ Qq Ff.

[353] _this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[354] _for_] _of_ Rowe.

[355] _What ... know what_:] Put in the margin by Pope.

[356] _Am ... go to_] _Go to. Am ... you?_ Collier MS.

[357] _my guests!_] Theobald. _my guests:_ Qq. _the guests_: Ff.

[358] _set_] _set a_ Q4 Q5.

[359] _is't_] _'tis_ F2 F3 F4.

[360] _You ... go_:] Omitted by Pope.

[361] _or--More ... shame!_] _or--More ... light.--For shame!_
Knight. _or (more ... shame)_ Q5. _or more ... light for shame,_ Q2
Q3 Q4 Ff. _or more light, for shame,_ F2 F3 F4. _or more light, for
shame;_ Rowe.

[362] _Now seeming_] _Now-seeming_ Lettsom conj.

_bitterest_] _bittrest_ Q2. _bitter_ The rest.

[Exit.] om. F2 F3 F4.

[Dance ends. Juliet retires to her Seat. Capell.

[363] [To Juliet] Rowe. drawing up to her, and taking her Hand. Capell.

_unworthiest_] _unworthy_ (Q1) Pope.

[364] _fine_] Theobald (Warburton). _sin_ Q2 Q3 Ff. _Sinne_ (Q1) Q4 Q5.

_is this_] _be this_ Hammer.

[365] _two_] _to_ F1.

_ready_] (Q1) F2 Q5 F3 F4. _did ready_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 (_readie_ Q2).

[366] _Good ... much_,] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[367] _hands that_] Q5. _hands, that_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _hands, the_ F3
F4. _hands--the_ Rowe.

_hands do_] _hand, doe_ F2. _hand, do_ F3 F4.

[368] _Saints ... book._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[369] _Saints ... sake._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_though_] _yet_ Pope.

[370] _prayer's effect I take_] Capell. _prayers effect I take_ (Q1) Qq
F1. _prayers effect doe take_ F2 F3 F4.

[371] _thine_] _yours_ (Q1) Capell.

[Kissing her.] Rowe.

[372] _that they have_] _that late they_ Pope.

[373] _sin_] _kiss_ Capell.

[Kissing her again. Capell.

_by the_] (Q1). _bith_ Qq. _by' th'_ F1 F2. _by th'_ F3 F4.

[374] [To her Nurse. Pope.

[375] _talk'd_] _talkt_ (Q1) Qq F1. _talke_ F2. _talk_ F3 F4.

[376] _chinks_] _chincke_ Rowe (ed 2). _chink_ Pope.

_Capulet_] _Mountague_ (Q1). _Catulet_ Q3.

[377] _debt_] _thrall_ (Q1). See note (II).

[378] [Going. Collier, ed. 2 (Collier MS.).

[379] [Maskers excuse themselves with a Bow. Capell.

[380] _on then_,] _on, then_, Dyce. _on, then_ Qq Ff.

[381] [to his Cousin. Capell.

[382] [Exeunt ... Nurse.] Malone. Exeunt. F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1. Company
retire. Capell.

[383] _Come ... gentleman?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_yond_] _yond'_ F4. _yon_ Pope.

[384] _of_] _of the_ Q4 Q5.

[385] _Marry ... be_] _That as I think is_ (Q1) Pope.

_be_] _to be_ F3 F4.

[386] _there_] (Q1) Capell. _here_ Qq Ff.

[387] _wedding_] _wedded_ F1.

[388] _your_] _our_ F2 F3 F4.

[389] _unknown_] _unknow_ F2.

[390] [Going and returning. Collier (ed. 2).

[391] _this ... this_] Ff. _tis ... tis_ Qq.

_learn'd_] _learne_ F1.

_even_] _e'en_ Pope.

[392] _all are_] _are all_ Q4.




ACT II.


PROLOGUE.

                          _Enter_ Chorus.[393]

    _Chor._ Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,[394]
      And young affection gapes to be his heir;
    That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,[395]
      With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.[396]
    Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,                              5
      Alike bewitched by the charm of looks,
    But to his foe supposed he must complain,
      And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
    Being held a foe, he may not have access
      To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;                    10
    And she as much in love, her means much less
      To meet her new beloved any where:
    But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
    Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.[397]        [_Exit._


SCENE I. _A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard._[398]

                        _Enter_ ROMEO, _alone_.

    _Rom._ Can I go forward when my heart is here?
    Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

                        [_He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it._

                   _Enter_ BENVOLIO _with_ MERCUTIO.

    _Ben._ Romeo! my cousin Romeo![399]

    _Mer._                         He is wise;[400][401]
    And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.[401]

    _Ben._ He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:              5
    Call, good Mercutio.

    _Mer._               Nay, I'll conjure too.[402]
    Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover![403]
    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:[404]
    Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;[405]
    Cry but 'ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'[406]            10
    Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,[407]
    One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,[408]
    Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim[409][410]
    When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid![410]
    He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;[411]              15
    The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.[412]
    I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,[413]
    By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
    By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh,
    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,                         20
    That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

    _Ben._ An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.[414]

    _Mer._ This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
    To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle[415]
    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand[416]               25
    Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
    That were some spite: my invocation[417]
    Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name[415][417][418]
    I conjure only but to raise up him.

    _Ben._ Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,[419]          30
    To be consorted with the humorous night:
    Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.

    _Mer._ If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
    Now will he sit under a medlar-tree,
    And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit[420]                35
    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.[421]
    O, Romeo, that she were, O, that she were[422][423]
    An open et cetera, thou a poperin pear![423][424]
    Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
    This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:[425]                  40
    Come, shall we go?[426]

    _Ben._             Go then, for 'tis in vain[426][427]
    To seek him here that means not to be found.              [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Capulet's orchard._[428]

                          _Enter_ ROMEO.[429]

    _Rom._ He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

                                    [_Juliet appears above at a window._

    But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?[430]
    It is the east, and Juliet is the sun!
    Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
    Who is already sick and pale with grief,                           5
    That thou her maid art far more fair than she:[431]
    Be not her maid, since she is envious;
    Her vestal livery is but sick and green,[432]
    And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
    It is my lady; O, it is my love![433]                             10
    O, that she knew she were![433][434]
    She speaks, yet she says nothing: what of that?
    Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
    I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
    Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,[435]                  15
    Having some business, do intreat her eyes[436]
    To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
    What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
    The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
    As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven[437]                  20
    Would through the airy region stream so bright
    That birds would sing and think it were not night.[438]
    See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
    O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
    That I might touch that cheek!

    _Jul._                         Ay me!

    _Rom._                                She speaks:[439]            25
    O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
    As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,[440]
    As is a winged messenger of heaven[441]
    Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes[442]
    Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him,                         30
    When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds[443]
    And sails upon the bosom of the air.

    _Jul._ O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?[444]
    Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
    Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,                       35
    And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

    _Rom._ [_Aside_] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?[445]

    _Jul._ 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
    Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.[446]
    What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,[447]                   40
    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part[448]
    Belonging to a man. O, be some other name![448][449]
    What's in a name? that which we call a rose[450]
    By any other name would smell as sweet;[451]
    So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,[452]                    45
    Retain that dear perfection which he owes
    Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,[453]
    And for thy name, which is no part of thee,[454]
    Take all myself.

    _Rom._           I take thee at thy word:[455]
    Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;                       50
    Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

    _Jul._ What man art thou, that, thus bescreen'd in night,[456]
    So stumblest on my counsel?

    _Rom._                      By a name[457]
    I know not how to tell thee who I am:[457]
    My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,                        55
    Because it is an enemy to thee;
    Had I it written, I would tear the word.

    _Jul._ My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words[458]
    Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound:[459]
    Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?                               60

    _Rom._ Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.[460]

    _Jul._ How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?[461]
    The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
    And the place death, considering who thou art,
    If any of my kinsmen find thee here.[462]                         65

    _Rom._ With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls,[463]
    For stony limits cannot hold love out:
    And what love can do, that dares love attempt;
    Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.[464]

    _Jul._ If they do see thee, they will murder thee.                70

    _Rom._ Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
    Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
    And I am proof against their enmity.

    _Jul._ I would not for the world they saw thee here.

    _Rom._ I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes;[465]      75
    And but thou love me, let them find me here:[466]
    My life were better ended by their hate,
    Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

    _Jul._ By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

    _Rom._ By love, that first did prompt me to inquire;[467]         80
    He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
    I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far[468]
    As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,[469]
    I would adventure for such merchandise.[470]

    _Jul._ Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,[471]         85
    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
    For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
    Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
    What I have spoke: but farewell compliment![472]
    Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'[473]                90
    And I will take thy word: yet, if thou swear'st,
    Thou mayst prove false: at lovers' perjuries,[474]
    They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,[475]
    If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
    Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,[476]                    95
    I'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
    So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
    In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;
    And therefore thou mayst think my 'haviour light:[477]
    But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true                    100
    Than those that have more cunning to be strange.[478]
    I should have been more strange, I must confess,
    But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
    My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,[479]
    And not impute this yielding to light love,                      105
    Which the dark night hath so discovered.

    _Rom._ Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,[480]
    That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,--[481]

    _Jul._ O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,[482]
    That monthly changes in her circled orb,[483]                    110
    Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

    _Rom._ What shall I swear by?

    _Jul._                              Do not swear at all;
    Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
    Which is the god of my idolatry,
    And I'll believe thee.

    _Rom._                 If my heart's dear love--[484]            115

    _Jul._ Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,[485]
    I have no joy of this contract to-night:
    It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,[486]
    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
    Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night![487]           120
    This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,[488]
    May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
    Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
    Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

    _Rom._ O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?                     125

    _Jul._ What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

    _Rom._ The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.[489]

    _Jul._ I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
    And yet I would it were to give again.

    _Rom._ Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?[490]    130

    _Jul._ But to be frank, and give it thee again.
    And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
    My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
    My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
    The more I have, for both are infinite.                          135
    I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu![491]

                                                  [_Nurse calls within._

    Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
    Stay but a little, I will come again.[492]      [_Exit._

    _Rom._ O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,[493]
    Being in night, all this is but a dream,                         140
    Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.[494]

                      _Re-enter_ JULIET, _above_.

    _Jul._ Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.[495]
    If that thy bent of love be honourable,
    Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
    By one that I'll procure to come to thee,                        145
    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,[496]
    And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.[497]

    _Nurse._ [_Within_] Madam![498]

    _Jul._ I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,[499]         150
    I do beseech thee--[498]

    _Nurse._ [_Within_] Madam!

    _Jul._                 By and by, I come:--
    To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:[500]
    To-morrow will I send.

    _Rom._                 So thrive my soul,--[501]

    _Jul._ A thousand times good night!      [_Exit._[502]

    _Rom._ A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.[503]       155
    Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from their books,
    But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.[504]

                                                     [_Retiring slowly._

                      _Re-enter_ JULIET, _above_.

    _Jul._ Hist! Romeo, hist!--O, for a falconer's voice,
    To lure this tassel-gentle back again![505]
    Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;[506]                 160
    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
    And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine[507][508]
    With repetition of my Romeo's name.[508][509]
    Romeo![510]

    _Rom._ It is my soul that calls upon my name:[511]               165
    How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
    Like softest music to attending ears!

    _Jul._ Romeo!

    _Rom._        My dear?[512]

    _Jul._                 At what o'clock to-morrow
    Shall I send to thee?

    _Rom._                At the hour of nine.[513]

    _Jul._ I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.[514]        170
    I have forgot why I did call thee back.

    _Rom._ Let me stand here till thou remember it.

    _Jul._ I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,[515]
    Remembering how I love thy company.

    _Rom._ And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,           175
    Forgetting any other home but this.[516]

    _Jul._ 'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
    And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,[517]
    Who lets it hop a little from her hand,[518]
    Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,                       180
    And with a silk thread plucks it back again,[519]
    So loving-jealous of his liberty.[520]

    _Rom._ I would I were thy bird.

    _Jul._                          Sweet, so would I:
    Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
    Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow[521]        185
    That I shall say good night till it be morrow.[521][522]      [_Exit._

    _Rom._ Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast![521]
    Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest![521]
    Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,[521][523]
    His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.[521]      [_Exit._    190


SCENE III. _Friar Laurence's cell._[524]

             _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE, _with a basket_.[525]

    _Fri. L._ The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,[526]
    Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;[526][527]
    And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels[526][528]
    From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:[526][529]
    Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,                          5
    The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
    I must up-fill this osier cage of ours[530]
    With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.[531]
    The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;[532]
    What is her burying grave, that is her womb:                      10
    And from her womb children of divers kind
    We sucking on her natural bosom find,
    Many for many virtues excellent,[533]
    None but for some, and yet all different.
    O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies                         15
    In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:[534]
    For nought so vile that on the earth doth live,
    But to the earth some special good doth give;[535]
    Nor aught so good, but, strain'd from that fair use,
    Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:[536]                 20
    Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
    And vice sometime's by action dignified.[537]
    Within the infant rind of this small flower[538]
    Poison hath residence, and medicine power:[539]
    For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part,[540]      25
    Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.[541]
    Two such opposed kings encamp them still[542]
    In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
    And where the worser is predominant,
    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.[543]               30

                             _Enter_ ROMEO.

    _Rom._ Good morrow, father.

    _Fri. L._                   Benedicite![544]
    What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?[545]
    Young son, it argues a distemper'd head[546]
    So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
    Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,                      35
    And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;[547]
    But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain[548]
    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
    Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
    Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;[549]                   40
    Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
    Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

    _Rom._ That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

    _Fri. L._ God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

    _Rom._ With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;                      45
    I have forgot that name and that name's woe.

    _Fri. L._ That's my good son: but where hast thou been then?

    _Rom._ I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
    I have been feasting with mine enemy;
    Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,                            50
    That's by me wounded: both our remedies[550]
    Within thy help and holy physic lies:
    I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
    My intercession likewise steads my foe.

    _Fri. L._ Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;[551]       55
    Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

    _Rom._ Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:[552]
    As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
    And all combined, save what thou must combine                     60
    By holy marriage: when, and where, and how,
    We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
    I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,[553]
    That thou consent to marry us to-day.

    _Fri. L._ Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here![554]         65
    Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,[555]
    So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
    Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
    Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine[556]
    Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline![557]                  70
    How much salt water thrown away in waste,[558]
    To season love, that of it doth not taste!
    The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
    Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears;[559]
    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit[560]                   75
    Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
    If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
    Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
    And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then:[561]
    Women may fall when there's no strength in men.                   80

    _Rom._ Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

    _Fri. L._ For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

    _Rom._ And bad'st me bury love.

    _Fri. L._                       Not in a grave,
    To lay one in, another out to have.[562]

    _Rom._ I pray thee, chide not: she whom I love now[563]           85
    Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
    The other did not so.

    _Fri. L._             O, she knew well
    Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.[564]
    But come, young waverer, come, go with me,[565]
    In one respect I'll thy assistant be;                             90
    For this alliance may so happy prove,
    To turn your households' rancour to pure love.[566]

    _Rom._ O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

    _Fri._ L. Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _A street._[567]

                    _Enter_ BENVOLIO _and_ MERCUTIO.

    _Mer._ Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came[568][569]
    he not home to-night?[569]

    _Ben._ Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.[569]

    _Mer._ Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,[570][571]
    Torments him so that he will sure run mad.[571]                    5

    _Ben._ Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,[572][573]
    Hath sent a letter to his father's house.[572]

    _Mer._ A challenge, on my life.

    _Ben._ Romeo will answer it.

    _Mer._ Any man that can write may answer a letter.                10

    _Ben._ Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
    dares, being dared.

    _Mer._ Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabbed
    with a white wench's black eye; shot thorough the ear with[574]
    a love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind       15
    bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

    _Ben._ Why, what is Tybalt?[575][576]

    _Mer._ More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he's[576][577]
    the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you
    sing prick-song, keeps time, distance and proportion;[578]        20
    rests me his minim rest, one, two, and the third in your[579]
    bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist;[580]
    a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and
    second cause: ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso!
    the hai![581]                                                     25

    _Ben._ The what?

    _Mer._ The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
        fantasticoes;[582][583]
    these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu, a very good[583][584]
    blade! a very tall man! a very good whore!' Why, is
    not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be         30
    thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers,
    these perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form[585]
    that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O, their[586]
    bones, their bones![587]

                             _Enter_ ROMEO.

    _Ben._ Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.[588]                   35

    _Mer._ Without his roe, like a dried herring: O flesh,
    flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
    that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
        kitchen-wench;[589]
    marry, she had a better love to be-rhyme her; Dido,
    a dowdy; Cleopatra, a gipsy; Helen and Hero, hildings and[590]    40
    harlots; Thisbe, a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose.[591]
    Signior Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation to your[592]
    French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.[593]

    _Rom._ Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit[594]
    did I give you?[594]                                              45

    _Mer._ The slip, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?[594]

    _Rom._ Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great;[594][595]
    and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.[594][596]

    _Mer._ That's as much as to say, Such a case as yours[594]
    constrains a man to bow in the hams.[594]                         50

    _Rom._ Meaning, to court'sy.[594][597]

    _Mer._ Thou hast most kindly hit it.[594]

    _Rom._ A most courteous exposition.[594][598]

    _Mer._ Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.[594]

    _Rom._ Pink for flower.[594]                                      55

    _Mer._ Right.[594]

    _Rom._ Why, then is my pump well flowered.[594]

    _Mer._ Well said: follow me this jest now, till thou hast[594][599]
    worn out thy pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn,[594]
    the jest may remain, after the wearing, solely singular.[594][600]  60

    _Rom._ O single-soled jest, solely singular for the[594][601]
    singleness![594][601]

    _Mer._ Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.[594][602]

    _Rom._ Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a[594][603][604]
    match.[594][603]                                                  65

    _Mer._ Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have[594][605][606]
    done; for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy[594][606]
    wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five: was I with[594]
    you there for the goose?[594]

    _Rom._ Thou wast never with me for any thing when[594][607]       70
    thou wast not there for the goose.[594]

    _Mer._ I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.[594]

    _Rom._ Nay, good goose, bite not.[594]

    _Mer._ Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most[594][608][609]
    sharp sauce.[594][608]                                            75

    _Rom._ And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?[594][610]

    _Mer._ O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an[594]
    inch narrow to an ell broad![594]

    _Rom._ I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added[594]
    to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.[594][611]   80

    _Mer._ Why, is not this better now than groaning for[594][612]
    love? now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art[594][613]
    thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature: for this[594]
    drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up[594]
    and down to hide his bauble in a hole.[594][614]                  85

    _Ben._ Stop there, stop there.[594]

    _Mer._ Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the[594]
    hair.[594]

    _Ben._ Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.[594]

    _Mer._ O, thou art deceived; I would have made it[594]            90
    short: for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and[594][615]
    meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer.[594]

    _Rom._ Here's goodly gear![616]

                       _Enter_ Nurse _and_ Peter.

    _Mer._ A sail, a sail![617]

    _Ben._ Two, two; a shirt and a smock.[618]                        95

    _Nurse._ Peter!

    _Peter._ Anon?

    _Nurse._ My fan, Peter.

    _Mer._ Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the[619][620]
    fairer of the two.[620][621]                                     100

    _Nurse._ God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

    _Mer._ God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.[622]

    _Nurse._ Is it good den?[623]

    _Mer._ 'Tis no less, I tell you; for the bawdy hand of[624]
    the dial is now upon the prick of noon.                          105

    _Nurse._ Out upon you! what a man are you!

    _Rom._ One, gentlewoman, that God hath made himself[625]
    to mar.

    _Nurse._ By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to[626]
    mar,' quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where[627]     110
    I may find the young Romeo?[628]

    _Rom._ I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older
    when you have found him than he was when you sought
    him: I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

    _Nurse._ You say well.                                           115

    _Mer._ Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
    wisely, wisely.

    _Nurse._ If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with[629]
    you.

    _Ben._ She will indite him to some supper.[630]                  120

    _Mer._ A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!

    _Rom._ What hast thou found?[631]

    _Mer._ No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,[631]
    that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.[631][632] [_Sings._
                  An old hare hoar,[631][633]                        125
                  And an old hare hoar,[631][633]
                Is very good meat in lent:[631][633]
                  But a hare that is hoar,[631][633]
                  Is too much for a score,[631][633]
                When it hoars ere it be spent.[631][633]             130
    Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner thither.

    _Rom._ I will follow you.

    _Mer._ Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, [_singing_] 'lady,[634]
    lady, lady.'       [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._[635]         135

    _Nurse._ Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy[636]
    merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?[637]

    _Rom._ A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself[638]
    talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
    to in a month.[639]                                              140

    _Nurse._ An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take[640]
    him down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such[641]
    Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall. Scurvy
    knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of his
        skains-mates.[642]
    [_Turning to Peter_] And thou must stand by too,[643]            145
    and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?

    _Peter._ I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had,
    my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you:
    I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
    good quarrel and the law on my side.                             150

    _Nurse._ Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every
    part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a
    word: and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire[644]
    you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself: but[644]
    first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool's
        paradise,[645]                                               155
    as they say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as
    they say: for the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if[646]
    you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill
    thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak[647]
    dealing.                                                         160

    _Rom._ Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.[648]
    I protest unto thee--[649]

    _Nurse._ Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as
    much: Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

    _Rom._ What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not             165
    mark me.[650]

    _Nurse._ I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which,
    as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.[651]

    _Rom._ Bid her devise[652]
    Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;[652]                170
    And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell[653]
    Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.

    _Nurse._ No, truly, sir; not a penny.

    _Rom._ Go to; I say you shall.

    _Nurse._ This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.          175

    _Rom._ And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey-wall:[654]
    Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;[655]
    Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
    Must be my convoy in the secret night.                           180
    Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:[656]
    Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.[657]

    _Nurse._ Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

    _Rom._ What say'st thou, my dear nurse?[658]

    _Nurse._ Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,[659][660]   185
    Two may keep counsel, putting one away?[659][661]

    _Rom._ I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.[662]

    _Nurse._ Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,[663]
    Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing--O, there is[663]
    a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife[663]    190
    aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very[663][664]
    toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her that[663][665]
    Paris is the properer man; but, I'll warrant you, when I[663]
    say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world.[663][666]
    Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?[663]       195

    _Rom._ Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.[663]

    _Nurse._ Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for[663][667][668]
    the--No; I know it begins with some other letter--and[663][668][669]
    she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary,[663]
    that it would do you good to hear it.[663][670]                  200

    _Rom._ Commend me to thy lady.[663][671]

    _Nurse._ Ay, a thousand times. [_Exit Romeo._] Peter![663][672]

    _Pet._ Anon![663][673]

    _Nurse._ Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.[663][674]

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _Capulet's orchard._[675]

                            _Enter_ JULIET.

    _Jul._ The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
    In half an hour she promised to return.[676]
    Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
    O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,[677]
    Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams[678]             5
    Driving back shadows over louring hills:[679]
    Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,[680]
    And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.[681]
    Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
    Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve                  10
    Is three long hours; yet she is not come.[682]
    Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
    She would be as swift in motion as a ball;[683]
    My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
    And his to me:[684][685]                                          15
    But old folks, many feign as they were dead;[685][686]
    Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.[687]

                   _Enter_ Nurse, _with_ Peter.[688]

    O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?[689]
    Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

    _Nurse._ Peter, stay at the gate.[690]         [_Exit Peter._     20

    _Jul._ Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?[691]
    Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;[692][693]
    If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news[692][694]
    By playing it to me with so sour a face.[692]

    _Nurse._ I am a-weary; give me leave awhile.[695]                 25
    Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunce have I had![696]

    _Jul._ I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news:
    Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.[697]

    _Nurse._ Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?[698][699]
    Do you not see that I am out of breath?[699][700]                 30

    _Jul._ How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath[699]
    To say to me that thou art out of breath?[699]
    The excuse that thou dost make in this delay[699]
    Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.[699]
    Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;[701]                    35
    Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
    Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

    _Nurse._ Well, you have made a simple choice; you know[702]
    not how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his face[702]
    be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's;
        and[702][703]                                                 40
    for a hand, and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be[702][704]
    talked on, yet they are past compare: he is not the flower of[702]
    courtesy, but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy[702][705]
    ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?[702]

    _Jul._ No, no: but all this did I know before.[706]               45
    What says he of our marriage? what of that?

    _Nurse._ Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
    It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
    My back o' t' other side,--ah, my back, my back![707]
    Beshrew your heart for sending me about,                          50
    To catch my death with jauncing up and down![708]

    _Jul._ I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.[709]
    Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

    _Nurse._ Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and[710]
    a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, a[710]   55
    virtuous,--Where is your mother?[710]

    _Jul._ Where is my mother! why, she is within;[711]
    Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest![711]
    'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
    Where is your mother?'

    _Nurse._               O God's lady dear![712]                    60
    Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
    Henceforward do your messages yourself.

    _Jul._ Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?

    _Nurse._ Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?               65

    _Jul._ I have.

    _Nurse._ Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;[713]
    There stays a husband to make you a wife:
    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
    They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.[714]                  70
    Hie you to church; I must another way,
    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
    Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:[715]
    I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
    But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.                     75
    Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.

    _Jul._ Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.       [_Exeunt._


SCENE VI. _Friar Laurence's cell._[716]

                _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE _and_ ROMEO.[717]

    _Fri. L._ So smile the heavens upon this holy act
    That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!

    _Rom._ Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
    That one short minute gives me in her sight:                       5
    Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
    Then love-devouring death do what he dare,[718]
    It is enough I may but call her mine.[719]

    _Fri. L._ These violent delights have violent ends
    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder[720]               10
    Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey[721]
    Is loathsome in his own deliciousness[722]
    And in the taste confounds the appetite:
    Therefore, love moderately; long love doth so;
    Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.                           15

                            _Enter_ JULIET.

    Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
    Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
    A lover may bestride the gossamer[723]
    That idles in the wanton summer air,[723]
    And yet not fall; so light is vanity.                             20

    _Jul._ Good even to my ghostly confessor.

    _Fri. L._ Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

    _Jul._ As much to him, else is his thanks too much.[724]

    _Rom._ Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy[725]
    Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more                   25
    To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
    This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue[726]
    Unfold the imagined happiness that both
    Receive in either by this dear encounter.

    _Jul._ Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,                30
    Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
    They are but beggars that can count their worth;
    But my true love is grown to such excess,[727]
    I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.[728]

    _Fri. L._ Come, come with me, and we will make short work;        35
    For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
    Till holy church incorporate two in one.[729]      [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[393] ACT II. PROLOGUE. Enter Chorus. Chor.] Edd. Chorus. Qq Ff. ACT
II. SCENE I. Chorus. Rowe. Enter Chorus. Theobald.

[394] _in_] _on_ Pope.

[395] _for which_] _which_ Steevens (1793).]

_groan'd for_] _groned_ Q5. _groan'd sore_ Rowe.

[396] _match'd_] _match_ Q2.

[397] _Tempering_] _Tempring_ Qq. _Temp'ring_ F1. _Temp'ting_ F2.
_Tempting_ F3 F4.

[Exit.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[398] SCENE I.] Edd. SCENE II. Rowe. ACT II. Theobald. ACT II. SCENE I.
Hanmer. SCENE III. Capell.

A lane ...] Edd. The Street. Rowe. Wall of Capulet's Garden. Capell. An
open Place, adjoining Capulet's garden. Malone.

[399] _thy_] Qq F1. _my_ F2 F3 F4.

_centre_] _center_ Qq F1 F4. _centour_ F2. _centor_ F3.

[He ... it.] Steevens (1793). om. Qq Ff. Exit. Rowe. Leaps the Wall.
Capell. He climbs the wall, and leaps down. Malone.

[400] _my_] _why_, Capell.

_cousin Romeo_] (Q1) Pope. _cozen Romeo, Romeo_ Qq Ff.

[401] _He ... bed._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[402] _Nay ... too._] Given to Mercutio by (Q1) Q4 Q5 and Rowe.
Continued to Benvolio in Q2 Q3 Ff.

[403] _Romeo!_] Capell. _Romeo._ Q4. _Romeo_, Q5. Mer. _Romeo_, Q2 Q3
F1 F2. Mer. _Romeo_ F3 F4. _Why, Romeo!_ Pope. _Hear, Romeo!_ Mommsen,
conj.

_humours!... lover!_] _humour's-madman! passion-lover_ Singer (ed. 2).

[404] _sigh_] _fight_ F2 F3 F4.

[405] _one rhyme_] _one rime_ (Q1) Q3 Q4 F1. _on rime_ Q2. _one time_
F2 F3 F4. _one ryme_ Q5.

[406] _Cry but 'ay me!'_] _Crie but ay me,_ Q2. _Cry but ay me_, Q3
Q4 Q5. _Cry me but ay me,_ F1. _Cry me but ayme_, F2 F3. _Cry me but
aim_, F4. _Cry but Ah me!_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_pronounce_] (Q1) Q4 Q5. _prouaunt_, Q2 Q3. _Prouant_, F1. _Couply_ F2
F3 F4. _couple_ Rowe.

_dove_ (Q1) Pope. _day_ Q2 Q3 Ff. _die_ Q4. _dye_ Q5.

[407] _gossip_] (Q1) Q4 Q5 F4. _goship_ Q2 Q3 F1 F2 F3.

_word_] _wor_ F2.

[408] _for_] _to_ Q5.

_heir_] _heire_ (Q1) Q4 Q5. _her_ Q2 Q3 Ff.

[409] _Adam Cupid_] Steevens, 1778 (Upton conj.). _Abraham: Cupid_ (Q1)
Q2 Q3. _Abraham Cupid_ Q4 Ff Q5. _auburn Cupid_ Dyce, ed. 1 (Theobald
conj.). _abram Cupid_ Dyce conj.

_trim_] (Q1) Steevens _true_ Qq Ff. See note (III).

[410] _Young ... maid_] "_Young Abraham_"--"_Cupid ... maid_" Hunter
conj.

[411] _he stirreth_] _he striveth_ Q3. _stirreth_ Steevens (1793).

_moveth_] _moves_ Hanmer.

[412] _and_] om. F1.

[413] _thee_] _the_ Q3.

[414] _An_] _An_' Theobald (ed. 2). _And_ Qq Ff.

[415] _mistress_'] _mistress's_ F4.

[416] _there_] om. F1.

[417] _That ... name_] As in Capell. Two lines, the first ending
_spight_, in Qq Ff.

[418] _Is fair and honest_] _is Honest and fair_ Pope, reading
_That ... is_ as one line.

_and in_] _in_ Q2.

[419] _these_] _those_ (Q1) Capell.

[420] _that_] _such_ Capell.

[421] _As_] _Which_ Rowe.

_medlars_] _medless_ Q4.

[422] _O, ... O_,] _Ah, ... ah_, Capell.

[423] _O, Romeo ... pear!_] Omitted by Pope.

[424] _open et cetera, thou_] (Q1) Malone. _open, or thou_ Q2 Q3 Ff.
_open & catera, and thou_ Q4. _open and catera, and thou_ Q5.
_open--or thou_ Rowe. _open--, and thou_ Capell.

[425] _too_] _to_ Q3 Q4 F1.

[426] _Go ... found._] Arranged as by Pope. Two lines, the first ending
_here_, in Qq Ff.

[427] [Exeunt.] Q4 Ff Q5. Exit. Q2 Q3.

[428] SCENE II.] Hanmer. SCENE III. Rowe. SCENE IV. Capell.

Capulet's orchard.] A garden. Rowe. Capulet's garden. Theobald.

[429] Enter Romeo.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff. See note (IV).

[430] [Juliet ...] Rowe (after line 3). Enter Juliet, above. Capell.

[431] _art_] _at_ Q4.

[432] _sick_] _pale_ (Q1) Dyce (ed. 2). _white_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[433] _It is ... were_] As in Johnson. One line in Qq Ff. Omitted in
(Q1) Pope.

[434] _were_] _is_ Seymour conj.

[435] _in all_] _of all_ Rowe.

[436] _do_] _to_ Q2.

[437] _eyes_] (Q1) Pope. _eye_ Qq Ff.

[438] _were_] _was_ Seymour conj.

[439] _Ay_] _Ah_ Rowe.

[440] _night_] _sight_ Theobald.

[441] _of_] _from_ Rowe.

[442] _white-upturned_] Theobald (ed. 2). _white upturned_ Qq Ff.

[443] _lazy-pacing_] Pope. _lasie pacing_ (Q1). _lazie puffing_ Qq Ff
(_lazy_ F2 F3 F4). _lazy passing_ Collier conj.

[444] _Romeo?_] _Montague?_ Anon. conj.

[445] [Aside] Rowe.

_hear_] _here_ F2.

[446] _Thou ... Montague_] Qq Ff. Omitted in (Q1) Pope. _Thou'rt not
thy self so, though a Mountague_ Hanmer. _Thou art thyself, then not
a Montague_ Johnson conj. _Thou art thyself though, not a Montague_
Malone. _Thou art thyself, although a Montague_ or _Thou art thyself,
though yet a Montague_ Ritson conj. _Thou art thyself, thought not
a Montague_ Jackson conj. _Thou art thyself, thou; not a Montague_
Anon. conj.

[447] _nor hand_] _not hand_ F4.

[448] _nor any ... name!_] Malone. _nor any other part._ (Q1) Pope. _O
be some other name Belonging to a man._ Qq Ff.

[449] _Belonging to a_] _'Longing to_ Steevens conj. _'Longing t' a_ S.
Walker conj. _Belonging_ Taylor conj. MS.

[450] _What's in a name?_] Q4 Q5 F3 F4. _Whats in a name?_ (Q1) F2.
_Whats in a name_ Q2. _What's in a name_ Q3. _What? in a names_ F1.

[451] _name_] (Q1) Pope. _word_ Qq Ff.

[452] _were_] _wene_ Q2.

[453] _title. Romeo_,] _title: Romeo_ Q5. _title; Romeo_, F4. _title,
Romeo_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _title Romeo_ (Q1). _title Romeo_, F1 F2 F3.

_doff_] Qq Ff. _part_ (Q1). _quit_ Pope.

[454] _thy name_] Qq Ff. _that name_ (Q1) Rowe.

[455] [raising his Voice, and showing himself. Capell. Starting
forward. Collier (Collier MS.).

[456] _night_] _nigh_ F2.

[457] _By ... am_:] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[458] _yet not_] Qq Ff. _not yet_ (Q1) Capell.

[459] _thy ... uttering_] Qq Ff. _that ... utterance_ (Q1) Malone.
_that ... uttering_ Pope.

[460] _maid ... dislike_] Qq Ff. _saint ... displease_ (Q1) Pope.
_saint ... dislike_ Theobald. _maid ... mislike_ Anon. conj.

[461] _How ... wherefore?_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[462] _kinsmen_] _kismen_ Q2.

[463] _With ... walls_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[464] _let_] (Q1) Capell. _stop_ Qq Ff.

[465] _eyes_] Qq Ff. _sight_ (Q1) Capell.

[466] _And_] _An_ Anon. conj.

[467] _love_] _Love's_ Keightley.

_that_] _who_ (Q1) Capell.

_prompt_] (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _promp_ Qq F1.

[468] _pilot_] _Pylat_ Q2. _Pylot_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2.

[469] _vast shore wash'd_] _vast shore washt_ Q4 Q5. _vast shore,
washt_ (Q1). _vast shore washeth_ Q2. _vast shore washet_ Q3.
_vast-shore-washet_ F1. _vast-shore: washd_ F2. _vast-shore: wash'd_
F3. _vast-shore, wash'd_ F4.

_farthest_] Qq Ff. _furthest_ (Q1) Steevens (1793).

[470] _would_] (Q1) Pope. _should_ Qq Ff.

[471] _know'st_] Q5. _knowst_ (Q1). _knowest_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff.

_on_] _one_ F3.

[472] _compliment_] _complement_ Qq F1. _complements_ (Q1) F2 F3 F4.

[473] _love me? I_] Qq. _Love? I_ F1. _Love? O I_ F2 F3. _Love? O, I_
F4.

[474] _mayst_] _maist_ Q5. _maiest_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _mayest_ F3.
_may'st_ F4.]

_false: at ... perjuries_,] _false: at ... perjuries_ F1 Q5. _false
at ... perjuries._ Q2. _false, at ... perjuries_ Q3 F3. _false; at ...
perjuries_ Q4 F4. _false at ... perjuries_ F2.

[475] _laughs_] _laught_ F1.

[476] _think'st_] Q5. _thinkest_ The rest. _think_ (Q1) Pope.

[477] _mayst_] _maist_ Q5 F3. _maiest_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1. _mayest_ F2 F4.]

_'haviour_] Rowe. _haviour_ (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _behaviour_ Qq F1
(_behavior_ Q2).

[478] _more cunning_] (Q1) Pope. _coying_ Q2 Q3 F1. _more coying_ Q4
Q5. _more coyning_ F2 F3 F4.

[479] _true love's_] _true loves_ (Q1) Ff Q5. _truloue_ Q2. _trueloue_
Q3. _true loue_ Q4.

[480] _blessed_] (Q1) Qq. om. Ff.]

_swear_] (Q1) Malone. _vow_ Qq Ff.

[481] _tops,--_] _tops--_ Rowe. _tops._ Qq Ff.

[482] _inconstant_] _unconstant_ F3 F4.

[483] _circled_] _circle_ Q2.

[484] _heart's dear_] _true heart's_ (Q1) Pope.

_love--_] F2 F3 F4. _love._ Qq F1.

[485] _swear: although ... thee_,] _swear--although ... thee,_ Rowe.
_sweare, although ... thee:_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1. _sweare, although ...
thee,_ Q5. _sweare although ... thee,_ F2 F3 F4.

[486] _sudden_] _sodden_ F2.

[487] _lightens._] Rowe. _lightens_: Q5. _lightens_, The rest.

[488] _breath_,] _breath._ F2.

[489] _for mine_] Qq F1. _of mine_ F2 F3 F4.

[490] _Wouldst ... love?_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[491] [Nurse calls within.] Rowe. Cals within. Ff (Calls F4). Omitted
in Qq.

[492] [Exit.] Rowe. Omitted in Qq Ff.

[493] _afeard_] _afraid_ Rowe.

[494] _flattering-sweet_] Theobald. _flattering sweet_ Qq Ff.]

Re-enter Juliet, above.] Rowe. Enter. F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1.

[495] _Three ... indeed._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[496] _rite_] F3 F4. _right_ Q2 Q3 F1 F2. _rights_ Q4. _rites_ Q5.

[497] _my lord_] (Q1) Ff. _my L._ Q2 Q3. _my Love_ Q4 Q5.

[498] Nurse [Within.] Capell. Within: Ff. om. Qq. _Madam_ being put in
the margin.

[499] _mean'st_] Pope. _meanst_ Q5. _meanest_ The rest.

[500] _suit_] Q5. _sute_ Q4. _strife_ Q2 Q3 Ff. See note (V).

[501] _soul,--_] Theobald. _soule._ Qq F1 F2. _soul._ F3 F4.

[502] [Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[503] _light_] _sight_ Q4 Q5.

[504] _toward_] Qq. _towards_ Ff.

[Retiring slowly.] Malone. retires slowly. Capell, after line 156.

Re-enter ...] Malone. Enter Juliet againe. Qq Ff.]

[505] _tassel-gentle_] Hanmer. _Tassel gentle_ Qq Ff.

[506] _not_] om. Q4.

[507] _tongue_] _voice_ (Q1) Collier.

[508] _than mine With_] Q5. _then myne With_ Q4. _then With_ Q2 Q3 F1.
_then with The_ F2 F3. _than with The_ F4.

[509] _Romeo's name_] (Q1) Steevens. _Romeo_ Qq Ff.

[510] _Romeo!_] Edd. from (Q1). om. Qq Ff.

[511] _my soul_] _my love_ Q4 Q5.

[returns to the Window. Capell.

[512] _My dear?_] _My Deere._ Q4 Q5. _Madame._ (Q1) Malone. _My Neece._
Q2 Q3 F1. _My sweete._ F2. _My sweet._ F3 F4. _My novice?_ Jackson
conj. _My--Nurse._ [Within.] _Madam._ Knight.

_At what_] (Q1) Pope. _What_ Qq Ff.

_o'_] Theobald. _a_ Qq Ff.

[513] _At_] (Q1) Capell. _By_ Qq Ff.

[514] _years_] _yeare_ Q2.

[515] _I shall ... stand_] _I shall forget still, to have thee stand_
Capell. _I'll still forget, to have thee still stand_ Rann.

_forget, to_] Q3 Q4 Ff. _forget to_ Q2 Q5.

_thee_] _the_ Q3 F2.

[516] _home_] _name_ F2 F3 F4.

[517] _farther_] Qq. _further_ (Q1) Ff.

[518] _Who ... her_] (Q1) Capell. _That his_ Qq Ff. _That ... her_
Pope.

_a_] om. Q4.

[519] _silk thread plucks it back again_] Pope. _silke thred puts it
backe againe_ (Q1). _silken thred plucks it backe againe_ Qq F1
(_threed_, Q2). _silken thred plucks it againe_ F2 F3 F4.

[520] _loving-jealous_] Theobald. _loving jealous_ Qq Ff.

[521] _Good night ... tell._] See note (VI).

[522] [Exit.] Pope. F2 F3 F4 after line 186. om. Qq F1.

[523] _father's cell_] (Q1) Capell. _Friers close cell_ Qq F3 F4.
_Fries close cell_ F1 F2.

[524] SCENE III] Hanmer. SCENE IV Rowe. SCENE V. Capell.

Friar Laurence's cell.] Malone. A Monastery. Rowe. Fields near a
Convent. Capell.

[525] Enter....] Rowe. Enter Frier alone with a basket. Qq Ff. Enter
Frier Francis. (Q1).

[526] _The ... wheels_:] Omitted in F2 F3 F4. See note (VI).

[527] _Chequering_] _Checking_ Q2.

[528] _flecked darkness_] Steevens, from (Q1). _fleckeld darknesse_
Qq. _fleckled darknesse_ F1. _darkness flecker'd_ Pope. _flecker'd
darkness_ Capell.

[529] _path ... fiery_] (Q1) Boswell. _path_, _and Titans burning_ Qq
F1. _path-way made by Titan's_ Pope.

[530] _up-fill_] _fill up_ Pope.

[531] _baleful_] _haleful_ Brae conj.

_precious-juiced_] Pope. _precious juiced_ Qq Ff.

[532] _mother is_] _mother in_ Q4 Q5.

[533] _virtues_] _vertures_ Q4.

[534] _herbs, plants_] (Q1) Capell. _plants, hearbes_ Qq F1 F3 F4.
_plaints, hearbs_ F2. _herbs, stems or herbs, flowers_ Theobald
conj.

[535] _to_] _to't_ Hanmer.

[536] _from ... stumbling_] _to vice, and stumbles_ (Q1) Pope.
_from's true birth stumbling_ Hanmer.

[537] _sometime's by action_] Capell. _sometimes by action_ (Q1).
_sometime by action_ Qq Ff. _sometime by action's_ Theobald.

[538] _small_] (Q1) Pope. _weake_ Qq Ff.

[539] _medicine_] _medic'nal_ Warburton. _med'cine's_ Capell conj.

[540] _smelt, with that part_] Ff. _smelt with that part,_ Qq.
_smelt, with that sense_ Pope. _smelt, with that act_ Collier
(Collier MS.). _smelt to, with that_ Anon. conj., from (Q1).

[541] _slays_] _staies_ Q2.

_senses_] Q5 F4. _sences_ Q2 Q4 F1 F2 F3. _sence_ Q3.

[542] _opposed_] _oppos'd_ F3 F4.

_kings_] _kinds_ Rowe (ed. 2). _foes_ (Q1) Pope. _kin_ Warburton.
_things_ Anon. conj.

[543] Enter Romeo.] Pope. Qq Ff after line 22.

[544] _Benedicite_] _Benedicitie_ Q2. _Benedecite_ F1. Continued to
Romeo by Rann (Anon. conj. Gent. Mag. LX. 681).

[545] _sweet_] _soon_ (Q1) Boswell.

_saluteth me_] (Q1) Qq F1. _salute thine_ F2. _salute them_ F3 F4.
_salutes mine ear_ Rowe.

[546] _distemper'd_] Q5 F4. _distempered_ The rest.

[547] _lodges_] Qq F1. _lodgeth_ (Q1) F2 F3 F4.

[548] _unbruised_] _unbusied_ Collier MS.

[549] _by some_] (Q1) Pope. _with some_ Qq Ff.

[550] _wounded: both_] Ff. _wounded, both_ (Q1) Q3 Q4. _wounded
both_, Q2. _wounded; both_ Q5.

[551] _and_] Qq. _rest_ Ff.

[552] _daughter_] _daunger_ F2.

[553] _thee_] _the_ F2 F4.

[554] _Saint_] F4. _S._ The rest.

[555] _that_] _whom_ (Q1) Pope.

[556] _Jesu Maria_] _Holy Saint Francis_ Johnson.

[557] _sallow_] _fallow_ F2 F3 F4.

[558] _thrown_] _throne_ Q4.

[559] _ring yet_] (Q1) Pope. _yet ringing_ Q2 Q3 F1. _yet ring_ Q4 F2
Q5 F3 F4.

_mine_] Q2 Q5. _my_ (Q1) Q3 Q4 Ff.

[560] _cheek_] _check_ F3.

[561] _this_] _this_: Q5.

_sentence_] _sedtence_ F2.

[562] _in, another_] _in an other_ Q2. _in another_ F2.

[563] _thee_] _the_ F2.

_chide not: she whom I_] _chide not, she whom I_ (Q1) Pope. _chide
me not, her I_ Qq Ff.

[564] _and could_] (Q1) Pope. _that could_ Qq Ff.

[565] _go_] _and goe_ Q4 Q5.

[566] _households' rancour_] Capell. _housholds rancor_ Qq. _houshould
rancor_ F1. _houshold rancord_ F2 F3. _houshold-rancour_ F4.

[567] SCENE IV.] Hanmer. SCENE V. Rowe. ACT III. SCENE I. Capell.

A street.] Capell. The street. Rowe.

[568] _Where_] _Why, where_ Capell, reading as verse, and ending the
lines _be?... father's; ... man._

_devil_] F3 F4. _deule_ Q2. _deu'le_ Q3 Q4. _deu le_ F1. _devile_ F2.
_dev'll_ Q5.

[569] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Steevens.

[570] _Ah_] (Q1) Malone. _Why_ Qq Ff. _Ay_ Capell.

[571] _Ah ... mad_] Verse in (Q1) Qq. Prose in Ff.

[572] _Tybalt ... house_] Verse in (Q1) Theobald. Prose in Qq Ff.

[573] _kinsman_] _kisman_ Q2.

_to_] _of_ (Q1) Capell.

[574] _shot_] (Q1) Capell. _runne_ or _run_ Qq Ff.

_thorough_] (Q1) Capell. _through_ Qq Ff.

[575] Ben.] (Q1) Ff. Ro. or Rom. Qq.

[576] _Why ... you. O_] Capell, from (Q1). _Why ... Tybalt?_ Mer.
_More ... cats. Oh_ Qq Ff. _Why ... Tybalt?_ Mer. _More ... cats? Oh_
Theobald. _Why ... Tybalt more ... cats?_ Mer. O Rann.

[577] _prince_] _the prince_ Johnson (1771).

_he's_] _he is_ (Q1) Capell.

[578] _prick-song_] _pricksongs_ F4. _prick'd songs_ Johnson.

[579] _rests ... rest_] Malone, from (Q1). _he rests, his minum rests_
Q2. _he rests his minum rests_ Q3 Q4 Q5. _he rests his minum_ Ff.
_rests his minum_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[580] _very_] _wery_ F2.

_duellist_] F4. _dualist_ The rest.

[581] _the hai!_] _the Hay._ Qq Ff. _the, hay!--_ Theobald.
_the--hay!_ Capell.

[582] _affecting_] _affected_ Pope.

[583] _fantasticoes_] (Q1) Capell. _phantacies_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2.
_phantasies_ Q5 F3 F4.

[584] _tuners_] _turners_ Rowe.

_accents_] (Q1) Q5. _accent_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff.

_By Jesu_] (Q1) Qq. _Jesu_ Ff. om. Johnson.

[585] _perdona-mi's_] Edd. (Globe ed.). _pardona' mees_ Q4 Q5.
_pardonmees_ (Q1). _pardons mees_ Q2. _pardon mees_ Q3. _pardon-mee's_
F1 F2. _pardon-me's_ F3 F4. _pardonnez-moy's_ Theobald.

[586] _they_] _the_ F2.

[587] _bones, their bones_] Qq Ff. _bon's, their bon's_ Theobald.
_buon's, their buon's_ Anon. conj.

Enter Romeo.] Qq Ff. Transferred by Dyce to follow _purpose_, line 41.

[588] _Here comes Romeo_] Once only in (Q1) Pope.

[589] _Petrarch_] _Petrach_ Q2.

_was but_] (Q1) Pope. _was_ Qq Ff.

[590] _hildings_] _hildinsgs_ F1 F2.

[591] _so, but not_] _so: but now_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[592] _bon jour_] _Bonieur_ Q2 Q4. _Bonieur_ Q3.

[593] _slop_] _stop_ Pope.

_You gave ... night_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[594] _What counterfeit ... no longer_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[595] _good_] Qq. om. Ff.

[596] _courtesy_] _coursie_ F2 F3.

[597] _court'sy_] _courtesie_ F2 F3 F4. _cursie_ Qq F1.

[598] _courteous_] _curtuous_ Q2.

[599] _Well said_:] Capell, from (Q1). _Sure wit_ Q2. _Sure wit_, The
rest. _Sure wit--_ Rowe. _Sir wit_, Anon. conj. _Sheer wit!_ Malone
conj.

[600] _solely_] _solie_ (Q1). _soly_ Qq. _sole--_ Ff. _sole_ Dyce (ed.
1).

[601] _O ... singleness_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[602] _wits faint_] Q5. _wits faints_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1. _wit faints_ F2 F3
F4. _wits fail_ (Q1) Steevens.

[603] _Switch ... match_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[604] _Switch ... switch_] Pope. _Swits ... swits_ Qq Ff.
_Switches ... switches_ Anon. conj.

_or I'll_] _or--I'll_ Johnson. _for I_ Capell.

[605] _thy wits_] (Q1) Capell. _our wits_ Qq Ff.

_I have_] (Q1) Capell. _I am_ Qq Ff.

[606] _wild-goose_] _wild goats_ Grey conj.

[607] _Thou wast_] Qq F1. _Thou wert_ (Q1). _Thou was_ F2 F3 F4.

[608] _Thy ... sauce_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[609] _bitter sweeting_] Qq. _bitter-sweeting_ Ff.

[610] _well_] _then well_ Q2.

_in to_] (Q1) Qq. _into_ Ff.

[611] _thee_] _the_ F2 F3 F4.

_a broad_] (Q1) Qq. _abroad_ Ff. _broad_ Rowe (ed. 2). _abroad_, Farmer
conj. _abroad--_ Collier.

[612] _now_] om. Rowe (ed. 2).

[613] _art thou sociable_] _thou art sociable_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[614] _hide_] _hid_ F1.

_bauble_] F4. _bable_ The rest.

[615] _for_] (Q1) Qq F4. _or_ F1 F2 F3.

[616] Enter ...] Enter Nurse and her man. Qq Ff (after _longer_, line
92).

[617] Mer. _A sail, a sail!_] Mer. _A sail, a sail, a sail!_ (Q1)
Capell. _A sayle, a sayle._ Qq Ff (continued to Romeo).

[618] Ben.] (Q1) Capell. Mer. Qq Ff.

[619] _Good_] _Do good_ Pope, from (Q1).

[620] _Good ... face._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff, and elsewhere.

[621] _fairer of the two_] (Q1) Pope. _fairer face_ Qq Ff.

[622] _gentlewoman_] _gentlewomen_ F2 F3.

[623] _Is it_] _It is_ F2. _Is is_ Rowe (ed. 1).

[624] _you_] _yee_ Q2.

[625] _himself_] _for himself_ (Q1) Collier.

[626] _well said_] (Q1) Qq. _said_ F1 F2 F3. _sad_ F4.

[627] _quoth a'_] _quath a_ Q3 Q4. _quatha_ F1. _quotha_ F2 F3 F4.

_Gentlemen_] _Gentleman_ F2 F3.

[628] _the_] om. (Q1) Pope.

[629] _If you_] _If thou_ Q4 Q5.

[630] _indite_] _endite_ Qq F1. _invite_ (Q1) F3 F4. _envite_ F2.

_some_] om. (Q1) Capell.

[631] Rom. _What ... spent_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[632] [Sings.] Singing. Capell. om. Qq Ff. He walkes by them, and
sings. (Q1).

[633] _An old ... spent._] As in Capell. Two lines in Qq Ff. Four in
(Q1) Collier.

[634] [singing] Dyce (Farmer conj.).

[635] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt. Qq. Exit. Mercutio, Benvolio. Ff.

[636] _Marry, farewell!_] (Q1) Malone. om. Qq Ff.

[637] _ropery_] _roguery_ F4. _roperipe_ (Q1).

[638] _hear_] _here_ F2.

[639] _to_] _too_ Q2.

[640] _An_] Pope. _And_ Qq Ff.

[641] _an_] Pope. & F1. _and_ The rest.

[642] _his_] _her_ Q5.

_flirt-gills_] _flurt-gills_ (Q1). _flurt gills_ Q2. _flurt gils_ Q3.
_flurt-gils_ Ff. _gil-flurts_ Q4 Q5.

_skains-mates_] F4. _skaines mates_ (Q1) Qq F1 F2. _skains mates_ F3.
_scurvy mates_ S. Walker conj. _stews-mates_ Bubier conj.

[643] [Turning to Peter.] Edd. She turnes to Peter her man. (Q1). om.
Qq Ff. To her man. Rowe.

[644] _bade ... bade_] _bad ... bad_ (Q1) Capell. _bid ... bid_ Qq Ff.

[645] _into a_] (Q1) Theobald. _in a_ Qq Ff. _into_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[646] _gentlewoman_] _gentlewomen_ F2.

[647] _weak_] _wicked_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[648] Rom.] Nur. F1.

_Nurse_,] om. Rowe.

[649] _thee--_] F2 F3 F4. _thee._ Qq F1.

_unto_] _onto_ F2.

[650] _me._] _mee._ Q5. _me?_ or _mee?_ The rest.

[651] _a_] om. Q4.

[652] _Bid ... afternoon_;] Edd. One line in Q2 Q3 Ff. Prose in Q4 Q5.
Capell ends the first line at _shrift_, reading as verse.

[653] _Laurence'_] _Lawrence_ Qq Ff. _Lawrence's_ Rowe.

[654] _stay_] Qq. _stay thou_ Ff.

_nurse, behind ... wall_:] _nurse: behind ... wall_ Anon. conj.

[655] _thee_] _the_ F2 F3.

_tackled_] _tackling_ Q5.

[656] _quit_] Q2. _quite_ The rest.

[657] _Farewell ... mistress._] Omitted by Pope, Theobald, Hanmer,
Warburton, and Johnson.

_mistress_] _mistress, nurse_ Martley conj.

[658] _say'st_] _sayest_ Pope.

[659] _Is ... away?_] Verse by Rowe. Prose in Qq Ff.

[660] _hear_] F3 F4. _here_ Qq. _heare_ F1 F2.

[661] _away?_] Q5 F4. _away._ The rest.

[662] _I warrant_] F2 F3 F4. _Warrant_ Qq Ff.

_man's_] Rowe. _mans_ Qq. _man_ Ff.

[663] As verse by Capell.

[664] _lief_] _leeve_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2 F3. _liefe_ Q5. _live_ F4.

_see a_] _a see_ F1.

[665] _I anger_] _I do anger_ Capell.

_anger her_] _angerer_ Q4.

[666] _versal_] _varsal_ Hanmer.

[667] _Ah_,] Rowe. _A_ Qq Ff.

_dog's name_;] _dog, name_ Q2. _dog's_; or _dog's letter_, Farmer conj.

[668] _R is for the--No_;] Edd. (Ritson conj.). _R. is for the no_,
Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff. _R. is for the no._ Q5. _R. is for thee? No;_ Theobald
(Warburton). _R. is not for thee_, Hanmer. _R is for the nonce;_
Steevens, 1773 (Johnson conj.). _R for thee? no_; Capell. _R is for
the dog. No;_ Steevens, 1778 (Tyrwhitt conj.).

[669] _some_] _no_ Rowe.

[670] _that it would_] _'Twould_ Capell.

[671] _lady._] _lady--_ Pope.

[672] _Ay_] _I_ Qq Ff. om. Rowe.

_times._ [Exit Romeo] _Peter!_] Dyce. _times Peter._ Q2. _timesÂ·
Peter?_ Q3. _times Peter?_ Q4. _times. Peter?_ Ff. _times. Peter._ Q5.
_times. Peter,--_ Theobald.

[Exit Romeo.] Rowe after line 201. om. Qq Ff.

[673] _Anon!_] _Anon._ Qq Ff. _Anon?_ Theobald.

[674] _Peter ... apace._] Edd. _Peter, take my fan, and go before._
(Q1) Steevens. _Before and apace._ Qq Ff (_Before_, F4). _Take my fan,
and go before._ Pope. _Before; and walk apace_ Capell.

[Exeunt.] Rowe. Ex. omnes. (Q1). Exit. Qq. Exit Nurse and Peter. Ff
(Ex. F4).

[675] SCENE V.] Hanmer. SCENE VI. Rowe. ACT III. SCENE II. Capell.

Capulet's orchard.] Capulet's House. Rowe. Capulet's Garden. Capell.

[676] _promised_] _promis'd_ Q5.

[677] _heralds_] (Q1) Q5. _heraulds_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F4. _herauld_ F1 F3.
_herauid_ F2.

[678] _glide_] F4. _glides_ The rest.

_sun's beams_] _sun-beams_ Rowe.

[679] _back_] _black_ Collier MS.

_louring_] _lowring_ Qq Ff.

[680] _nimble-pinion'd_] Pope inserted the hyphen.

[681] _wind-swift_] Q3 Ff. _wind swift_ Q2. _winde swift_ Q4.
_winde-swift_ Q5.

[682] _Is three_] Q3 Q4 Q5. _Is there_ Q2. _I three_ Ff. _Ay three_
Rowe. _Are three_ Hanmer.

_yet_] _and yet_ Rowe.

[683] _She would be as_] Qq F1. _She'ld be as_ F2 F3 F4. _She would
be_ Anon. conj.

[684] _And his to me_:] _And his to me would send her back again._
Seymour conj. _And his to me would bandy her again_ Keightley.

[685] _And ... dead_;] Arranged as in Rowe. See note (VII).

[686] _many feign_] _marry, feign_ Johnson. _marry, seem_ Keightley.
_marry, fare_ Grant White. _tarry, faith,_ Bullock conj. _move,
i'faith_, Dyce conj.

[687] _pale_] _dull_ Keightley (Collier MS.).

[688] Enter Nurse, with Peter.] Theobald. Enter Nurse. Qq Ff.

[689] _O God_] _O good_ Johnson.

_O honey nurse_] om. Pope.

[690] [Exit Peter.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[691] _Now ... sad?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_look'st_] Q4 Q5 F4. _lookest_ Q2 Q3 F1. _lookes_ F2. _looks_ F3.

[692] _Though ... face._] Omitted by (Q1) Pope.

[693] _news be_] F4. _newes be_ Q2 Q5. _newes, be_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _news,
be_ F3.

[694] _shamest_] Q2 Q3. _sham'st_ Q4 Ff Q5.

[695] _give me leave_] _let me rest_ (Q1) Pope.

[696] _jaunce_] _iaunce_ Q2 Q3. _jaunt_ The rest.

_had_] om. Q2.

[697] _thee_] _the_ F2.

_good, good_] _good_ F2 F3 F4.

[698] _Jesu_] om. Johnson.

[699] _Jesu ... excuse._] _Give me some Aqua vitÃ¦._ Pope, from (Q1).

[700] _that_] Qq F1. om. F2. _how_ F3 F4.

[701] _Is_] Jul. _Is_ Pope.

[702] _Well ... home?_] As verse by Capell.

[703] _better than any_] _no better than another_ Warburton conj.

_leg excels_] Qq. _legs excels_ F1 F2 F3. _legs excell_ F4.

[704] _a body_] Q2 Q3 F1. _body_ Q4 Q5. _a bawdy_ F2 F3 F4. _a baudie_
(Q1). _baw-dy_ Rowe. _bo-dy_ Pope.

[705] _I'll_] _I_ F2 F3 F4.

_gentle as a_] Qq. _gentle a_ Ff.

[706] _this_] _this this_ F1.

[707] _My back ... side,--_] _My back!--o' t'other side,--_ Lloyd
conj.

_o' t' other_] _a tother_ Qq Ff.

_ah_] Q5. _a_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _o_ F1. _O_ F2 F3 F4.

[708] _jauncing_] _jaunsing_ Q2 Q3. _jaunting_ The rest.

[709] _not well_] Qq. _so well_ F1. _so ill_ F2 F3 F4.

[710] _Your ... mother?_] Prose by Edd. Three lines, ending
_gentleman, ... handsome, ... mother?_ in Qq Ff. Capell ends the
second line at _warrant_: Steevens at _handsome, and_.

[711] _Where ... repliest!_] As in Rowe. Two lines, the first ending
_be?_, in Qq. Three, ending _mother?... be?... repliest,_ in Ff.

[712] _your mother_] Qq F1. _my mother_ F2 F3 F4.

_O ... dear!_] Omitted by Johnson.

[713] _hie_] Q5 F4. _high_ The rest.

_Laurence'_] _Lawrence_ Qq Ff. _Lawrence's_ Rowe.

[714] _They'll ... any_] _They'll be in scarlet straitway at my_
Hanmer. _They'll be in scarlet straight at my next_ S. Walker conj.
_They will be straight in scarlet at my_ Keightley.

[715] _climb_] _climde_ Q3 F1.

[716] SCENE VI.] Hanmer. SCENE VII. Rowe. ACT III. SCENE III. Capell.

Friar Laurence's cell.] Capell. The Monastery. Rowe.

[717] Enter Frier Laurence....] Rowe. Enter Friar.... Qq Ff.

[718] _love-devouring_] Hyphen omitted in F2 F3.

_death do what he_] _death, do what thou_ Seymour conj.

[719] _enough I_] _inough. I_ F1 F2. _enough. I_ F3.

[720] _triumph_] _triumph_: F1.

[721] _kiss_] _meet_ Pope.

[722] _loathsome_] _lothsomnesse_ Q4 Q5.

_his_] _its_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[723] _gossamer ... idles_] _gossamour ... idles_ F4. _gossamours ...
ydeles_ Q2. _gossamours ... ydles_ Q3 F1 F2. _gossamours ... idles_
Q4 Q5 F3. _gossamours ... idle_ Malone.

[724] _else is_] Q2 Q3 F4. _else in_ Q4 F1 F2 Q5 F3. _else are_ Rowe.

[725] Rom.] Fri. F1.

[726] _music's_] _musicke_ Q2 Q3.

[727] _such_] _such such_ F1.

[728] _sum up sum of half my_] Q2 Q3. _summe up some of halfe my_ Q4
Q5. _sum up some of halfe my_ Ff. _sum up one half of my_ Pope. _sum
up sums of half my_ Johnson. _sum up half my sum of_ Capell. _sum
the sum of half my_ Anon. conj. ap. Rann.

[729] [Exeunt.] F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _A public place._[730]

         _Enter_ MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, _and_ Servants.[731]

    _Ben._ I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
    The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,[732]
    And, if we meet, we shall not 'scape a brawl;[733][734]
    For now these hot days is the mad blood stirring.[734]

    _Mer._ Thou art like one of those fellows that when he[735]        5
    enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword upon the
    table, and says 'God send me no need of thee!' and by the
    operation of the second cup draws it on the drawer, when[736]
    indeed there is no need.

    _Ben._ Am I like such a fellow?                                   10

    _Mer._ Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood
    as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody and as
    soon moody to be moved.

    _Ben._ And what to?[737]

    _Mer._ Nay, an there were two such, we should have[738]           15
    none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou
    wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more, or a hair
    less, in his beard than thou hast: thou wilt quarrel with a
    man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because
    thou hast hazel eyes; what eye, but such an eye, would spy        20
    out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of quarrels as an
    egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as
    addle as an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with
    a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened
    thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun: didst thou not          25
    fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before
    Easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old
    riband? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling![739]

    _Ben._ An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man[740]
    should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a            30
    quarter.

    _Mer._ The fee-simple! O simple!

                      _Enter_ TYBALT _and others_.

    _Ben._ By my head, here come the Capulets.[741]

    _Mer._ By my heel, I care not.[742]

    _Tyb._ Follow me close, for I will speak to them.                 35
    Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

    _Mer._ And but one word with one of us? couple it with[743]
    something; make it a word and a blow.

    _Tyb._ You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you[744]
    will give me occasion.[745]                                       40

    _Mer._ Could you not take some occasion without giving?

    _Tyb._ Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--[746]

    _Mer._ Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an[747]
    thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords:
    here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall make you                 45
    dance. 'Zounds, consort![748]

    _Ben._ We talk here in the public haunt of men:
    Either withdraw unto some private place,
    Or reason coldly of your grievances,[749]
    Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.                         50

    _Mer._ Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
    I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

                             _Enter_ ROMEO.

    _Tyb._ Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.

    _Mer._ But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery:
    Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;[750]           55
    Your worship in that sense may call him man.

    _Tyb._ Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford[751]
    No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

    _Rom._ Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee[752]
    Doth much excuse the appertaining rage[753]                       60
    To such a greeting: villain am I none;[754]
    Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.[755]

    _Tyb._ Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries[756]
    That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

    _Rom._ I do protest, I never injured thee,[757]                   65
    But love thee better than thou canst devise[758]
    Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
    And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
    As dearly as mine own,--be satisfied.[759]

    _Mer._ O calm, dishonourable, vile submission![760]               70
    Alla stoccata carries it away.[761]         [_Draws._
    Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?[762]

    _Tyb._ What wouldst thou have with me?[763]

    _Mer._ Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
    lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall         75
    use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you[764]
    pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? make[765]
    haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

    _Tyb._ I am for you.[766]                        [_Drawing._

    _Rom._ Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.                        80

    _Mer._ Come, sir, your passado.[767]      [_They fight._

    _Rom._ Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.[768][769]
    Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage![769]
    Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath[769][770]
    Forbid this bandying in Verona streets:[769][771][772][773]       85
    Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio![769][772][774]

                          [_Tybalt under Romeo's arm stabs Mercutio and_
                                             _flies with his followers._

    _Mer._                       I am hurt;[775]
    A plague o' both your houses! I am sped:
    Is he gone, and hath nothing?

    _Ben._                        What, art thou hurt?

    _Mer._ Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
    Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.[776]              90

                                                           [_Exit Page._

    _Rom._ Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

    _Mer._ No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
    church-door; but 'tis enough, 'twill serve: ask for me to-morrow,
    and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered,
    I warrant, for this world. A plague o' both your[777]             95
    houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a[778]
    man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by
    the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between[779]
    us? I was hurt under your arm.

    _Rom._ I thought all for the best.                               100

    _Mer._ Help me into some house, Benvolio,
    Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses![780]
    They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,[781][782]
    And soundly too: your houses![781][783]

                                   [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._[784]

    _Rom._ This gentleman, the prince's near ally,[785]              105
    My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt[786]
    In my behalf; my reputation stain'd[787]
    With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
    Hath been my kinsman: O sweet Juliet,[788]
    Thy beauty hath made me effeminate,                              110
    And in my temper soften'd valour's steel![789]

                          _Re-enter_ BENVOLIO.

    _Ben._ O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead![790]
    That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
    Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

    _Rom._ This day's black fate on more days doth depend;[791]      115
    This but begins the woe others must end.[792][793]

                           _Re-enter_ TYBALT.

    _Ben._ Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

    _Rom._ Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain![794]
    Away to heaven, respective lenity,
    And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now![795]                       120
    Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
    That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
    Is but a little way above our heads,
    Staying for thine to keep him company:
    Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.[796]               125

    _Tyb._ Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
    Shalt with him hence.

    _Rom._                This shall determine that.

                                            [_They fight; Tybalt falls._

    _Ben._ Romeo, away, be gone!
    The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain:
    Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death                130
    If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!

    _Rom._ O, I am fortune's fool!

    _Ben._                         Why dost thou stay?

                                                          [_Exit Romeo._

                         _Enter_ Citizens, &c.

    _First Cit._ Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?[797]
    Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?[798][799]

    _Ben._ There lies that Tybalt.

    _First Cit._                   Up, sir, go with me;[799][800]    135
    I charge thee in the prince's name, obey.[801]

     _Enter_ Prince, _attended_; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, _their_ Wives,
                             _and others_.

    _Prin._ Where are the vile beginners of this fray?[802]

    _Ben._ O noble prince, I can discover all[803]
    The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,                        140
    That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.[804]

    _La. Cap._ Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child![805]
    O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt[806]
    Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
    For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.                       145
    O cousin, cousin![807]

    _Prin._ Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?[808]

    _Ben._ Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
    Romeo that spoke him fair, bid him bethink[809]
    How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal                       150
    Your high displeasure: all this uttered
    With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,[810]
    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen[811]
    Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts[812]
    With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;                   155
    Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
    And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
    Cold death aside, and with the other sends
    It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
    Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,[813]                           160
    'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than his tongue,
    His agile arm beats down their fatal points,[814]
    And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
    An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
    Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled:                         165
    But by and by comes back to Romeo,
    Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,[815]
    And to't they go like lightning: for, ere I[816]
    Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
    And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly;[817]                    170
    This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

    _La. Cap._ He is a kinsman to the Montague,[804][818]
    Affection makes him false, he speaks not true:
    Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
    And all those twenty could but kill one life.                    175
    I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
    Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

    _Prin._ Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
    Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?[819]

    _Mon._ Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;[820]         180
    His fault concludes but what the law should end,
    The life of Tybalt.

    _Prin._             And for that offence
    Immediately we do exile him hence:
    I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,[821]
    My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;               185
    But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine,
    That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
    I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;[822]
    Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:[823]
    Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,                    190
    Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.[824]
    Bear hence this body, and attend our will:
    Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.       [_Exeunt._[825]


SCENE II. _Capulet's orchard._[826]

                          _Enter_ JULIET.[827]

    _Jul._ Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
    Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a waggoner[828]
    As Phaethon would whip you to the west,[829]
    And bring in cloudy night immediately.
    Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,                   5
    That runaway's eyes may wink, and Romeo[830]
    Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.[831]
    Lovers can see to do their amorous rites[832]
    By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,[833]
    It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,                     10
    Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,[834]
    And learn me how to lose a winning match,
    Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:[835]
    Hood my unmann'd blood bating in my cheeks[836]
    With thy black mantle, till strange love grown bold[837]          15
    Think true love acted simple modesty.[838]
    Come, night, come, Romeo, come, thou day in night;
    For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
    Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.[839]
    Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,             20
    Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,[840]
    Take him and cut him out in little stars,
    And he will make the face of heaven so fine
    That all the world will be in love with night[841]
    And pay no worship to the garish sun.                             25
    O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
    But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
    Not yet enjoy'd; so tedious is this day
    As is the night before some festival
    To an impatient child that hath new robes                         30
    And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
    And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
    But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.

                   _Enter_ Nurse, _with cords_.[842]

    Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords[843]
    That Romeo bid thee fetch?[844]

    _Nurse._                   Ay, ay, the cords.[844][845]           35

                                                    [_Throws them down._

    _Jul._ Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?[846]

    _Nurse._ Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead.[847]
    We are undone, lady, we are undone.
    Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead.[848]

    _Jul._ Can heaven be so envious?

    _Nurse._                         Romeo can,                       40
    Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
    Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

    _Jul._ What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?[849]
    This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
    Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'[850]                  45
    And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more[850]
    Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:[851]
    I am not I, if there be such an I,[852][853][854][855]
    Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'[852][853][855][856]
    If he be slain, say 'I;' or if not, no:[852][855]                 50
    Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.[852][857]

    _Nurse._ I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes--
    God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
    A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
    Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,[858]                  55
    All in gore blood: I swounded at the sight.[859]

    _Jul._ O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once![860]
    To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
    Vile earth, to earth resign, end motion here,[861]
    And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier![862]                     60

    _Nurse._ O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
    O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman![863]
    That ever I should live to see thee dead!

    _Jul._ What storm is this that blows so contrary?[864]
    Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?                         65
    My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?[865]
    Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom![866]
    For who is living, if those two are gone?

    _Nurse._ Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished:[867]
    Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.                            70

    _Jul._ O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?[868]

    _Nurse._ It did, it did; alas the day, it did![869]

    _Jul._ O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face![870]
    Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?[870]
    Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!                                75
    Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb![871][872]
    Despised substance of divinest show![872][873][874]
    Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,[872][873]
    A damned saint, an honourable villain![872][873][875]
    O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,                          80
    When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend[876]
    In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
    Was ever book containing such vile matter
    So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
    In such a gorgeous palace!

    _Nurse._                   There's no trust,[877]                 85
    No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,[877]
    All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.[877][878]
    Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitÃ¦:
    These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
    Shame come to Romeo!

    _Jul._               Blister'd be thy tongue[879]                 90
    For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
    Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
    For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
    Sole monarch of the universal earth.
    O, what a beast was I to chide at him![880]                       95

    _Nurse._ Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?[881]

    _Jul._ Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
    Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
    When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
    But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?               100
    That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
    Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
    Your tributary drops belong to woe,
    Which you mistaking offer up to joy.[882]
    My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;                  105
    And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:[883]
    All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
    Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,[884]
    That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;[885]
    But, O, it presses to my memory,                                 110
    Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
    'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished;'
    That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
    Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
    Was woe enough, if it had ended there:                           115
    Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
    And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,[886]
    Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'[887]
    Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
    Which modern lamentation might have moved?[888]                  120
    But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,[889]
    'Romeo is banished:' to speak that word,[890]
    Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
    All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished.'
    There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,                       125
    In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
    Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

    _Nurse._ Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:[891]
    Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

    _Jul._ Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,[892]  130
    When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
    Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,[893][894]
    Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:[893][895]
    He made you for a highway to my bed;[893][896]
    But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.[893][897]                     135
    Come, cords; come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;[893][898]
    And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead![893]

    _Nurse._ Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
    To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
    Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:[899]                  140
    I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

    _Jul._ O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
    And bid him come to take his last farewell.[900]      [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Friar Laurence's cell._[901]

                      _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE.[902]

    _Fri. L._ Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:[903]
    Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,[904]
    And thou art wedded to calamity.

                          _Enter_ ROMEO.[905]

    _Rom._ Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?[906]
    What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,[907]                   5
    That I yet know not?

    _Fri. L._            Too familiar
    Is my dear son with such sour company:[908]
    I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

    _Rom._ What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?[909]

    _Fri. L._ A gentler judgement vanish'd from his lips,[910]        10
    Not body's death, but body's banishment.

    _Rom._ Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
    For exile hath more terror in his look,
    Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'[911]

    _Fri. L._ Here from Verona art thou banished:[912]                15
    Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

    _Rom._ There is no world without Verona walls,[913]
    But purgatory, torture, hell itself.[914]
    Hence banished is banish'd from the world,[915]
    And world's exile is death: then 'banished'[916][917][918]        20
    Is death mis-term'd: calling death 'banished,'[917][919]
    Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
    And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.[920]

    _Fri. L._ O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
    Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,               25
    Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,[921]
    And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
    This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.[922]

    _Rom._ 'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
    Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog                         30
    And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
    Live here in heaven and may look on her,[923]
    But Romeo may not: more validity,
    More honourable state, more courtship lives
    In carrion-flies than Romeo: they may seize                       35
    On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand,
    And steal immortal blessing from her lips;[924]
    Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,[925][926]
    Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;[926][927]
    But Romeo may not; he is banished:[926][928]                      40
    This may flies do, but I from this must fly:[926][928]
    They are free men, but I am banished:[926][928]
    And say'st thou yet, that exile is not death?[926][928]
    Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,[926][929]
    No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,[926]               45
    But 'banished' to kill me?--'Banished'?[926]
    O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
    Howling attends it: how hast thou the heart,[930]
    Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
    A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,[931]                     50
    To mangle me with that word 'banished'?[932]

    _Fri. L._ Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.[933]

    _Rom._ O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

    _Fri. L._ I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;[934]
    Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,                               55
    To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

    _Rom._ Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
    Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
    Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
    It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.[935]                 60

    _Fr. L._ O, then I see that madmen have no ears.[936]

    _Rom._ How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?[937]

    _Fr. L._ Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.[938]

    _Rom._ Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:[939]
    Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,[940]                    65
    An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,[941]
    Doting like me, and like me banished,
    Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,[942]
    And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
    Taking the measure of an unmade grave.[943]  [_Knocking within._  70

    _Fri. L._ Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.[944]

    _Rom._ Not I; unless the breath of heart-sick groans[945][946]
    Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.[945][947]  [_Knocking._

    _Fri. L._ Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;[945][948]
    Thou wilt be taken.--Stay awhile!--Stand up;[949]      [_Knocking._  75
    Run to my study.--By and by! God's will,
    What simpleness is this!--I come, I come![950]      [_Knocking._
    Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?[951]

    _Nurse._ [_Within_] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand;[952]
    I come from Lady Juliet.

    _Fri. L._                Welcome, then.[953]                      80

                             _Enter_ Nurse.

    _Nurse._ O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
    Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?[954]

    _Fri. L._ There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.[955]

    _Nurse._ O, he is even in my mistress' case,[956]
    Just in her case!

    _Fr. L._          O woeful sympathy![957]                         85
    Piteous predicament![957]

    _Nurse._             Even so lies she,[958]
    Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
    Stand up, stand up; stand, an you be a man:[959][960]
    For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;[959]
    Why should you fall into so deep an O?[961]                       90

    _Rom._ Nurse![961]

    _Nurse._ Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.[962]

    _Rom._ Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?[963]
    Doth she not think me an old murderer,[964]
    Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy[965]                  95
    With blood removed but little from her own?
    Where is she? and how doth she? and what says[966]
    My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?[967]

    _Nurse._ O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
    And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,                    100
    And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,[968]
    And then down falls again.

    _Rom._                     As if that name,[969]
    Shot from the deadly level of a gun,[969][970]
    Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
    Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,[971]           105
    In what vile part of this anatomy[972]
    Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
    The hateful mansion.[973]       [_Drawing his sword._

    _Fri. L._            Hold thy desperate hand:
    Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
    Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote[974]                110
    The unreasonable fury of a beast:
    Unseemly woman in a seeming man![975]
    Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both![975][976]
    Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
    I thought thy disposition better temper'd.                       115
    Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
    And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,[977]
    By doing damned hate upon thyself?[978]
    Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?[978][979]
    Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet[978][980]    120
    In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose.[978][120][981]
    Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;[978]
    Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,[978][982]
    And usest none in that true use indeed[978]
    Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:[978]           125
    Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,[978]
    Digressing from the valour of a man;[978][983]
    Thy dear love sworn, but hollow perjury,[978]
    Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;[978]
    Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,[978]                   130
    Mis-shapen in the conduct of them both,[978]
    Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,[978][984]
    Is set a-fire by thine own ignorance,[978][985]
    And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.[978]
    What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,                      135
    For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
    There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
    But thou slew'st Tybalt; there art thou happy too:[986]
    The law, that threaten'd death, becomes thy friend,[987]
    And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:[988]                140
    A pack of blessings lights upon thy back;[989]
    Happiness courts thee in her best array;
    But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,[990]
    Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:[991]
    Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.                    145
    Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
    Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
    Where thou shalt live till we can find a time                    150
    To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
    Beg pardon of the prince and call thee back[992]
    With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
    Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
    Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady,                        155
    And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
    Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
    Romeo is coming.

    _Nurse._ O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night[993]
    To hear good counsel: O, what learning is![994]                  160
    My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

    _Rom._ Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

    _Nurse._ Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:[995]
    Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.[996]      [_Exit._

    _Rom._ How well my comfort is revived by this!                   165

    _Fri._ Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:[997][998]
    Either be gone before the watch be set,[997]
    Or by the break of day disguised from hence:[997][999]
    Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
    And he shall signify from time to time                           170
    Every good hap to you that chances here:
    Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.

    _Rom._ But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
    It were a grief, so brief to part with thee:
    Farewell.[1000]                 [_Exeunt._                       175


SCENE IV. _A room in Capulet's house._[1001]

           _Enter_ CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, _and_ PARIS.[1002]

    _Cap._ Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
    That we have had no time to move our daughter.[1003]
    Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
    And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
    'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night:                     5
    I promise you, but for your company,[1004]
    I would have been a-bed an hour ago.[1004][1005]

    _Par._ These times of woe afford no time to woo.[1006]
    Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.

    _La. Cap._ I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;[1007]       10
    To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.[1007][1008]

    _Cap._ Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender[1009]
    Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled[1010]
    In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.[1011]
    Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;                            15
    Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;[1012]
    And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--[1013][1014]
    But, soft! what day is this?

    _Par._                       Monday, my lord.

    _Cap._ Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon;[1014]
    O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,[1015][1016]         20
    She shall be married to this noble earl.[1015]
    Will you be ready? do you like this haste?[1015]
    We'll keep no great ado; a friend or two;[1017]
    For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
    It may be thought we held him carelessly,                         25
    Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
    Therefore we'll have some half-a-dozen friends,
    And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?[1018]

    _Par._ My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.[1019]

    _Cap._ Well, get you gone: o' Thursday be it then.[1020]          30
    Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,[1021]
    Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
    Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
    Afore me, it is so very very late,[1022]
    That we may call it early by and by:[1022][1023]                  35
    Good night.[1024]               [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. CAPULET'S ORCHARD.[1025]

       _Enter_ ROMEO _and_ JULIET, _above, at the window_.[1026]

    _Jul._ Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:[1027]
    It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
    That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
    Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate-tree:[1028]
    Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.                          5

    _Rom._ It was the lark, the herald of the morn,[1029]
    No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
    Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day[1030]
    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops:[1031]                   10
    I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

    _Jul._ Yond light is not day-light, I know it, I:[1032]
    It is some meteor that the sun exhales,[1033]
    To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
    And light thee on thy way to Mantua:                              15
    Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.[1034]

    _Rom._ Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;[1035]
    I am content, so thou wilt have it so.[1035]
    I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,[1035][1036]
    'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;[1035][1037]           20
    Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat[1035][1038]
    The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:[1035][1039]
    I have more care to stay than will to go:[1035][1040]
    Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
    How is't, my soul? let's talk: it is not day.[1041]               25

    _Jul._ It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
    Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
    Some say the lark makes sweet division;
    This doth not so, for she divideth us:                            30
    Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes;[1042]
    O, now I would they had changed voices too![1043]
    Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,[1044]
    Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day.[1044][1045]
    O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.[1046]              35

    _Rom._ More light and light: more dark and dark our woes![1047]

                 _Enter_ NURSE, _to the chamber_.[1048]

    _Nurse._ Madam!

    _Jul._ Nurse?[1049]

    _Nurse._ Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
    The day is broke; be wary, look about.[1050]      [_Exit._        40

    _Jul._ Then, window, let day in, and let life out.[1051]

    _Rom._ Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.[1052]

                                                      [_Descends._[1053]

    _Jul._ Art thou gone so? my lord, my love, my friend![1054]
    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,[1055]
    For in a minute there are many days:                              45
    O, by this count I shall be much in years
    Ere I again behold my Romeo!

    _Rom._ Farewell![1056]
    I will omit no opportunity[1056]
    That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.                      50

    _Jul._ O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?[1057]

    _Rom._ I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
    For sweet discourses in our time to come.[1058]

    _Jul._ O God! I have an ill-divining soul.[1059]
    Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,[1060]                    55
    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:[1061]
    Either my eyesight fails or thou look'st pale.[1062]

    _Rom._ And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:[1063]
    Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu![1064]      [_Exit._

    _Jul._ O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:[1065]        60
    If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
    That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;[1066]
    For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
    But send him back.[1067]

    _La. Cap._ [_Within_] Ho, daughter! are you up?

    _Jul._ Who is't that calls? it is my lady mother![1068]           65
    Is she not down so late, or up so early?[1069]
    What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?[1070]

                      _Enter_ LADY CAPULET.[1071]

    _La. Cap._ Why, how now, Juliet![1072]

    _Jul._                           Madam, I am not well.

    _La. Cap._ Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?               70
    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;[1073][1074]
    Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love.[1073]
    But much of grief shows still some want of wit.[1073]

    _Jul._ Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

    _La. Cap._ So shall you feel the loss, but not the
        friend[1075][1076]                                            75
    Which you weep for.[1076]

    _Jul._              Feeling so the loss,[1076]
    I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.[1076][1077]

    _La. Cap._ Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
    As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.[1078]

    _Jul._ What villain, madam?

    _La. Cap._                  That same villain, Romeo.[1079]       80

    _Jul._ [_Aside_] Villain and he be many miles asunder.[1080]
    God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;[1081][1082]
    And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.[1081]

    _La. Cap._ That is because the traitor murderer lives.[1081][1083]

    _Jul._ Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:[1081]         85
    Would none but I might venge my cousin's death![1081]

    _La. Cap._ We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:[1081]
    Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,[1081]
    Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,[1081]
    Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram[1081][1084]              90
    That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:[1081]
    And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.[1081]

    _Jul._ Indeed, I never shall be satisfied[1081]
    With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--[1081][1085]
    Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.[1081][1086]              95
    Madam, if you could find out but a man[1081]
    To bear a poison, I would temper it,[1081][1087]
    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,[1081]
    Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors[1081]
    To hear him named, and cannot come to him,[1081]                 100
    To wreak the love I bore my cousin[1081][1088]
    Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him![1081][1089]

    _La. Cap._ Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.[1081][1090]
    But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.[1081][1091]

    _Jul._ And joy comes well in such a needy time:[1092]            105
    What are they, I beseech your ladyship?[1093]

    _La. Cap._ Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
    That thou expect'st not, nor I look'd not for.[1094]             110

    _Jul._ Madam, in happy time, what day is that?[1095]

    _La. Cap._ Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
    The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
    The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,[1096]
    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.[1097]              115

    _Jul._ Now, by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,[1098]
    He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
    I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
    Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.[1099]
    I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,                      120
    I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,[1100]
    It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
    Rather than Paris. These are news indeed![1101]

    _La. Cap._ Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,[1102]
    And see how he will take it at your hands.[1103]                 125

                   _Enter_ CAPULET _and_ Nurse.[1104]

    _Cap._ When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;[1105][1106]
    But for the sunset of my brother's son[1105]
    It rains downright.[1105][1107]
    How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?[1107]
    Evermore showering? In one little body[1108]                     130
    Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:[1109]
    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
    Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,[1110]
    Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
    Who raging with thy tears, and they with them,[1111]             135
    Without a sudden calm will overset
    Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife![1112]
    Have you deliver'd to her our decree?[1113]

    _La. Cap._ Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.[1114]
    I would the fool were married to her grave!                      140

    _Cap._ Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
    How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?[1115]
    Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
    Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
    So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?[1116]                145

    _Jul._ Not proud, you have, but thankful that you have:[1117]
    Proud can I never be of what I hate;[1118]
    But thankful even for hate that is meant love.[1119]

    _Cap._ How, how! how, how! chop-logic! What is this?[1120]
    'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'[1121]         150
    And yet 'not proud:' mistress minion, you,[1121][1122]
    Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
    But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,[1123]
    To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.                         155
    Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage![1124][1125]
    You tallow-face![1124][1126]

    _La. Cap._       Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

    _Jul._ Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
    Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

    _Cap._ Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch![1127]       160
    I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,[1128]
    Or never after look me in the face:
    Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
    My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest[1129]
    That God had lent us but this only child,[1130]                  165
    But now I see this one is one too much
    And that we have a curse in having her:[1131]
    Out on her, hilding!

    _Nurse._             God in heaven bless her!
    You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.[1132]

    _Cap._ And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,[1127]          170
    Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.[1133]

    _Nurse._ I speak no treason.[1134]

    _Cap._                       O, God ye god-den.[1127]

    _Nurse._ May not one speak?

    _Cap._                      Peace, you mumbling fool![1135]
    Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;[1136]
    For here we need it not.

    _La. Cap._               You are too hot.                        175

    _Cap._ God's bread! it makes me mad:[1127][1137][1138]
    Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,[1137][1138][1139]
    Alone, in company, still my care hath been[1137]
    To have her match'd: and having now provided
    A gentleman of noble parentage,[1140]                            180
    Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,[1141]
    Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
    Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;[1142]
    And then to have a wretched puling fool,
    A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,[1143]                 185
    To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
    I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
    But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you:[1144]
    Graze where you will, you shall not house with me:
    Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.                     190
    Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
    An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;[1145]
    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,[1145][1146]
    For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:[1147]                 195
    Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.              [_Exit._

    _Jul._ Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
    That sees into the bottom of my grief?
    O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
    Delay this marriage for a month, a week;                         200
    Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
    In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.[1148]

    _La. Cap._ Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
    Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.                 [_Exit._

    _Jul._ O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?[1149]       205
    My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;[1150]
    How shall that faith return again to earth,[1150]
    Unless that husband send it me from heaven[1150]
    By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.[1150]
    Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems[1151]       210
    Upon so soft a subject as myself!
    What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?[1152]
    Some comfort, nurse.[1152]

    _Nurse._             Faith, here it is.[1153]
    Romeo is banish'd, and all the world to nothing,[1153][1154]
    That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;                  215
    Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.[1155]
    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
    I think it best you married with the county.[1156]
    O, he's a lovely gentleman![1157]
    Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,                     220
    Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye[1158]
    As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,[1159]
    I think you are happy in this second match,
    For it excels your first: or if it did not,
    Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were                    225
    As living here and you no use of him.[1160]

    _Jul._ Speakest thou from thy heart?[1161]

    _Nurse._ And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.[1162]

    _Jul._ Amen!

    _Nurse._ What?[1163]                                             230

    _Jul._ Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
    Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
    Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
    To make confession and to be absolved.[1164]

    _Nurse._ Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.[1165] [_Exit._  235

    _Jul._ Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend![1166]
    Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,[1167]
    Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
    Which she hath praised him with above compare
    So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;                          240
    Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.[1168]
    I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
    If all else fail, myself have power to die.[1169]      [_Exit._

FOOTNOTES:

[730] ACT III. SCENE I.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff. ACT III. SCENE IV. Capell.

A public place.] Capell. The street. Rowe.

[731] Enter....] Capell. Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and men. Qq Ff.

[732] _Capulets_] Q4 Q5 Ff. _Capels are_ (Q1). _Capels_ Q2 Q3.

[733] _And, if_] _An if_ S. Walker conj.

[734] _And ... stirring_] As in Rowe. Prose in Qq Ff.

[735] _those_] (Q1) F4. _these_ Qq F1 F2 F3.

[736] _of the_] _of a_ Rowe.

_it_] (Q1) Pope. _him_ Qq Ff.

[737] _to_] Pope. _too_ Qq Ff.

[738] _an_] Pope. _and_ Qq Ff.

[739] _from_] _for_ Q5.

[740] _An_] Capell. _And_ Qq Ff. _If_ Pope.

[741] Enter....] Capell. Enter Tybalt, Petruchio, and others. Qq Ff.
Transferred by Collier to follow line 33, by Dyce to follow line 34.

[742] _come the Capulets_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _comes a Capolet_ (Q1). _comes
the Capulets_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1.

[743] _us?_] _us_, Q2.

[744] _an_] Capell. _and_ Qq Ff. _if_ Pope.

[745] _will_] _shall_ Q5.

[746] _consort'st_] Ff. _consortest_ Qq. _consorts_ (Q1).

_Romeo,--_] _Romeo--_ Rowe. _Romeo._ Qq F1 F3 F4. _Romeo_, F2.

[747] _an_] Capell. _&._ Q3 F1. _and_ The rest. _if_ Pope.

[748] _'Zounds_,] _Zounds_ Qq. _Come_ Ff.

[Laying his Hand on his Sword. Rowe.

[749] _Or_] Qq Ff. _And_ Capell.

[750] _before_] _first_ Pope.

[751] _love_] Qq Ff. _hate_ (Q1) Pope.

[752] _that_] om. Capell.

[753] _excuse_] _exceed_ Collier MS.

[754] _villain am I none_] _villaine I am none_ Q5. Omitted in F2 F3
F4.

[755] _know'st_] _knowest_ Q2 Q3.

[756] _injuries_] _iniures_ F2.

[757] _injured_] _iniuried_ Q2.

[758] _love_] (Q1) Qq. _lov'd_ Ff.

_devise_] _devise_, Q5. _devise_: Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2 F3. _devise_; F4.

[759] _mine_] Q2. _my_ The rest.

[760] _calm, dishonourable_,] _calme dishonourable,_ Q4 Q5.

[761] _Alla stoccata_] Knight. _Alla stucatho_ Qq F1. _Allastucatho_
F2 F3 F4. _Ah! la Stoccata_ Theobald. _Ha! la stoccata_ Hanmer. _A la
stoccata_ Capell.

_carries it away_.] _carry it away!_ Lettsom conj.

_it_] _is_ F2.

[Draws.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[762] _you rat-catcher_,] _you, rat-catcher_ Rowe.

_will_] _come, will Hanmer_.

[763] _wouldst_] Q2 Q5 F4. _woulds_ The rest.

[764] _me hereafter_,] _me, hereafter_ Rowe.

_dry-beat_] Hyphened first in Rowe.

[765] _pilcher_] _pilche_ Warburton. _pitcher_ Singer conj. _pilch,
sir_, Staunton conj.

[766] [Drawing.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[767] [They fight.] Capell. Mer. and Tyb. fight. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[768] [draws and runs between. Capell.

[769] _Draw ... good Mercutio!_] Arranged as in Qq Ff. Capell ends
the lines _Benvolio; ... shame, ... Mercutio ... bandying ... good
Mercutio_.

[770] [striving to part them. Capell.

[771] _Forbid this_] Q2. _Forbid_ Q3 Q4 Q5. _Forbidden_ Ff.

[772] _in Verona streets: Hold, Tybalt!_] _Here in
Verona:--Tybalt_;--Seymour conj.

[773] _Verona_] _Verona's_ Q5.

[774] [Tybalt ...] Edd. (Globe ed.). Tibalt vnder Romeos arme thrusts
Mercutio, in and flyes. (Q1). Away Tybalt. Qq. Exit Tybalt. Ff.

[775] _o' both your_] Dyce. _a both_ Qq. _a both the_ F1. _of both the_
F2 F3 F4. _on your_(Q1). _o' both the_ Capell.

[776] [Exit Page.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[777] _o' both_] Capell. _a both_ Qq F1. _of both_ F2 F3 F4. _on both_
Johnson.

[778] _'Zounds_] Q5. _sounds_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _What_ Ff.

[779] _devil_] Rowe. _deule_ Q2. _deu'le_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _dev'll_ Q5.
_dev'l_ F3. _div'l_ F4.

[780] _o' both_] F4. _a both_ The rest. _on both_ Johnson.

[781] _I have it ... houses_] Arranged as by Dyce. One line in Qq Ff.

[782] _have it_] _ha't_ Capell.

[783] _soundly too: your houses!_] _soundly too--your houses._ Rowe.
_soundly, to your houses._ Q2. _soundly to your houses._ Q3 F1.
_soundly to your houses--_ Q4 Q5. _soundly too your houses._ F2.
_soundly too, your houses._ F3 F4. _soundly too. Plague o' your
houses!_ Theobald.

[784] [Exeunt ...] Ex. Mer. Ben. Rowe. Exit. Qq Ff. Exeunt. (Q1).

[785] SCENE II. Pope.

[786] _got this_] Q2. _tane this_ (Q1). _gott his_ Q3. _got his_ Q4 Ff
Q5.

[787] _reputation_] _reputation's_ S. Walker conj.

[788] _kinsman_] (Q1) Capell. _cozen_ Q2 F3 F4. _cozin_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2.
_cousin_ Q5.

[789] Re-enter ...] Re-enter ... hastily. Capell. Enter ... Qq Ff.

[790] _Mercutio's_] F2 Q5 F3 F4. _Mercutio is_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _Mercutio's
is_ F1.

[791] _more_] (Q1) Qq F1. _mo_ Q2 Q3 F1 F2 F3. _moe_ Q4.

_doth_] (Q1) Qq F1. _doe_ F2. _do_ F3. _does_ F4.

[792] _begins the woe_] Q5. _begins, the wo_ Q2 Q3 F1. _begins, the
woe_ Q4 F2 F3. _begins the woe_, F4.

[793] Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter ... (Q1) Ff. Omitted in Qq.
Transferred by Dyce to follow line 120.

[794] _Alive, in triumph!_] Pope, from (Q1). _He gan in triumph_ Q2.
_He gon in triumph_ Q3 Q4. _He gon in triumph,_ F1 F2. _He gone in
triumph_, Q5 F3 F4. _Again? in triumph?_ Capell.

[795] _fire-eyed_] Pope from (Q1). _fier end_ Q2. _fier and_ Q3.
_fire and_ Q4 F1 F2 Q5. _fire, and_ F3 F4.

[796] _Either_] _Or_ (Q1) Pope.

[797] Enter Citizens, &c.] Enter Citizens, Officers, &c. Capell. Enter
Citizens. Qq Ff.

[798] SCENE III. Pope.

[799] First Cit.] 1 Cit. Malone. Citti. or Citi. or Cit. Qq Ff. 1. O.
Capell.

[800] _Up_] _You_ Collier MS.

[801] _name_] _names_ F1.

Enter ...] Capell, substantially. Enter Prince, olde Mountague,
Capulet, their wives and all. Qq Ff.

[802] _vile_] _vild_ F2 F3.

[803] _all_] (Q1) Ff Q5. _all_: Q2 Q3 Q4.

[804] _kinsman_] _kisman_ Q2.

[805] La. Cap.] Rowe. Capu. Wi. or Cap. Wi. Qq Ff (and elsewhere).

[806] _O prince!... husband! O_,] _O Prince, O Cozen, husband,
O_ Qq Ff. _Unhappy sight! alas_ Pope, from (Q1). Prince,
_O--cousin--husband--O--_ Johnson. _O prince!--O husband!--O_, Capell,
corrected to _O cousin!--husband!--O_, in Notes and MS. _Unhappy
sight! ah me,_ Malone, from (Q1).

[807] _O cousin, cousin!_] Omitted by (Q1) Pope.

[808] _Benvolio_] om. Collier MS.

_bloody_] Qq. om. Ff.

[809] _bid_] (Q1) Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff. _bad_ Q5. _bade_ Malone.

[810] _bow'd_] Ff. _bowed_ Qq.

[811] _take_] _make_ Capell conj.

[812] _Tybalt_] _Tybalts_ F1.

[813] _it_] _it home_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[814] _agile_] _agill_ (Q1) Q4 Q5. _aged_ Q2 Q3 F1. _able_ F2 F3 F4.

[815] _entertain'd_] (Q1) Q5. _entertaind_ Q2. _entertayn'd_ Q4.
_entertained_ Q3 Ff.

[816] _And_] _An_ F3 F4.

_to't_] F3 F4. _toote_ Q2 Q3. _too't_ Q4 F1 F2 Q5.

[817] _and_] _to_ Rowe.

[818] _Montague_] _Mountagues_ Q5.

[819] _owe?_] Q3. _owe._ The rest.

[820] Mon.] Moun. Q4. Mou. Q5. Capu. Q2. Cap. Q3 Ff. La. Cap. Rowe. La.
Mont. Theobald.

[821] _I have ... proceeding_] _I had no interest in your heats
preceding_ Johnson conj.

_hate's_] Knight. _hates'_ Capell. _hates_ (Q1). _hearts_ Qq Ff.
_heats'_ Hanmer. _hearts'_ Johnson.

[822] _I will_] _It will_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[823] _out_] Qq. _our_ Ff. _for_ (Q1).

[824] _he's_] Theobald. _he is_ Qq Ff.

_his_] _the_ Q5.

[825] _but_] _not_ F1.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exeunt omnes. (Q1). Exit. Qq.

[826] SCENE II.] Rowe. SCENE IV. Pope. SCENE V. Capell.

Capulet's orchard.] Capulet's Garden. Capell. An Apartment in Capulet's
House. Rowe.

[827] Enter Juliet.] Enter Juliet alone. Qq Ff.

[828] _Towards_] Qq F1. _Toward_ F2 F3 F4. _To_ (Q1) Pope.

_lodging_] _mansion_ (Q1) Pope.

[829] _Phaethon_] _Phaetan_ Q2. _Phaeton_ The rest.

[830] _runaway's_] _runnawayes_ Q2 Q3. _run-awayes_ Q4 F1 Q5.
_run-awaies_ F2 F3. _run-aways_ F4. _th' Run-away's_ Theobald
(Warburton). _rumour's_ Hudson (Heath conj.). _run-away_ so quoted
by Blackstone. _Renomy's_ Mason conj. _unawares_ Knight, ed. 1, and
Collier, ed. 1 (Jackson conj.). _Luna's_ Mitford conj. _runagates'_
Muirson conj. _rumourers'_ Singer (ed. 2). _rumourous_ Singer conj.
(_withdrawn_). _Cynthia's_ S. Walker conj. _enemies'_ Collier, ed. 2
(Collier MS.). _rude day's_ Dyce. _soon day's_ or _roving_ Dyce conj.
_run-aways'_ Staunton. _sunny day's_ Clarke conj. (_sun away_) or
_unwary_ or _runagate_ or _run-astray_ Taylor MS. conj. _noonday's_
Anon. ap. Grant White conj. _yonder_ Leo conj. _run-abouts'_ Keightley.
_Titan's_ Bullock conj. _sun-awake's_ Brady conj. _wary ones'_ Anon.
conj. _ribalds'_ Anon. conj. _Uranus'_ Anon. conj. _roaming_ Anon. conj.

_wink_,] _weep_, So quoted by Knight.

[831] _Leap_] _Leapt_ F2 F3.

_unseen_.] Rowe. _unseene_: Q5. _unseene_, or _unseen_, The rest.

[832] _rites_] F4. _rights_ Qq F1 F2 F3.

[833] _By_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _And by_ Q1 Q3 F1.

_if love be_] _of love to_ Q4. _of love too_ Q5.

[834] _sober-suited_] Hyphen inserted in F4.

[835] _maidenhoods_] Q2 Q3 F1. _maidenheads_ The rest.

[836] _bating_] Steevens. _bayting_ Q2 Q3 F1 F2 F3. _baiting_ Q4 Q5 F4.

[837] _grown_] Rowe. _grow_ Qq Ff.

[838] _Think_] _Thinks_ Rowe.

[839] _new snow on_] F2 F3 F4. _new snow upon_ Q2 Q3 F1. _snow upon_
Q4 Q5.

[840] _he_] Q4 Q5. _I_ Q2 Q3 Ff.

[841] _will be_] _shall be_ Q5.

[842] Enter....] Qq Ff, after line 31. Enter Nurse at a distance.
Capell, after line 31. Transferred by Dyce.

[843] _Romeo's name_] Q5 F4. _Romeos, name_ F1 F2 F3. _Romeos name_
Q2 Q3 Q4.

[844] _the cords ... fetch_] As in Hanmer. One line in Qq Ff.

[845] [Throws....] Throwing.... Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[846] _Ay_] _Ah_ Hanmer.

_Ay ... hands?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[847] _Ah_] Pope. _A_ Qq Ff.

_well-a-day_] _welady_ Q3 Q4 Ff Q5. _weraday_ Q2.

_he's dead_] Thrice in Qq. Twice in Ff.

[848] _he's gone_] _hees is gone_ Q3.

[849] _What ... thus?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[850] _'I' ... 'I'_] _ay ... ay_ Rowe.

[851] _death-darting_] _death arting_ Q2.

[852] _I ... woe._] Omitted by Pope.

[853] Johnson would transpose these lines, reading _shot_ in the second.

[854] _an I_,] Q5. _an I._ The rest.

[855] _an I ... 'I' ... 'I'_] _an Ay ... Ay ... Ay_ Rowe.

[856] _shut_] Capell. _shot_ Qq Ff.]

_make thee_] Steevens, 1778 (Johnson conj.). _makes thee_ Qq F1. _makes
the_ F2 F3 F4.

[857] _Brief sounds_] F4. _Briefe sounds_ Q5. _Briefe, sounds_, Q2 Q3
Q4 F1 F2. _Brief, sounds_ F3.

_of_] Ff Q5. om. Q2 Q3 Q4. _or_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[858] _bedaub'd_] _bedawde_ Q4. _bedeaw'd_ Q5.

[859] _swounded_] (Q1). _swouned_ Q5. _swooned_ F4. _sounded_ The rest.

[860] _O ... once!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_bankrupt_] Q5 F4. _banckrout_ or _bankrout_ The rest.

[861] _to_] _too_ Q2.

[862] _one_] _on_ Q2 Q3 F1.

_bier_] Rowe. _beare_ Q2 Q3. _beere_ Q4 F1 F2 Q5. _beer_ F3 F4.

[863] _gentleman_] _gentlemen_ F2.

[864] _blows_] _bowes_ F2 F3.

[starting up. Capell.

[865] _dear-loved_] (Q1) Pope. _dearest_ Qq Ff.

_dearer_] _dearest_ (Q1).

[866] _Then_] _The_ F4.

_dreadful trumpet_] _let the trumpet_ (Q1) Pope.

[867] _gone_] _dead_ (Q1) Pope.

[868] _O God!_] As in Qq. As a separate line in Ff.

_did_] Nur. _Did_ F2 F3.

[869] Nurse.] (Q1) Q5 F4. Omitted in the rest.

[870] Jul. _O serpent ... Did_] F2. Q3 F3 F4. Nur. _O serpent ..._ Iv.
_Did_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1.

[871] _Dove-feather'd raven_] Theobald. _Ravenous dou featherd Rauen_
Q2 Q3 F1. _Ravenous dove, feathred Raven_ Q4 Q5 F2 F3 F4.

_wolvish-ravening lamb_] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

[872] _Dove-feather'd ... villain!_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[873] _Despised ... villain!_] Omitted by Hanmer.

[874] _Despised_] _Detested_ Long MS.

[875] _damned_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _dimme_ Q2 Q3. _dimne_ F1.

_villain_] _vallaine_ F2.

[876] _bower_] _power_ Q4. _poure_ Q5.

[877] _There's ... dissemblers_] As in Capell (following Pope). Two
lines, the first ending _men_, in Qq Ff.

[878] _All ... dissemblers_] _All, all forsworn; ... and all
dissemblers_ Pope. _All are forsworn, all false, all are dissemblers_
Seymour conj. _All naught, all forsworn, all dissemblers_ Anon. conj.

[879] _Blister'd_] _Blistered_ Q3 Q4 Q5.

[880] _at him_] Qq. _him_ F1. _him so_ F2 F3 F4.

[881] _Will ... cousin?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[882] _you_] _your_ F2 F3 F4.

[883] _Tybalt's_] _Tibalt_ or _Tybalt_ Ff.

_slain_] Qq F1. _kil'd_ F2. _kill'd_ F3 F4.

[884] _word there was_] Q2 F2 F3 F4. _words there was_ Q3 Q4 F1. _words
there were_ Q5.

[885] _murder'd_] _murdered_ Q4 F1 F3 F4.

[886] _rank'd_] _wrankt_ Q3 Q4.

[887] _follow'd_] Q5. _followed_ The rest.

[888] _Which ... moved?_] Omitted by Pope.

_modern_] _moderate_ Long MS.

[889] _with_] _which_ F1.

_rear-ward_] _rear-word_ Collier conj.

[890] _banished: to_] Q2 Q5. _banished to_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2 F3. _banished,
to_ F4.

[891] _corse_] Q4. _course_ Q2 Q3. _coarse_ (Q1) Ff Q5.

[892] _tears_:] _teares_: or _tears_: Q3 Q4 Ff. _teares?_ Q2. _teares_,
Q5.

[893] _Take ... maidenhead!_] Omitted by Pope.

[894] _ropes_] _rops_ F2.

[895] _I_;] _I_, Q5 F3 F4. _I_ The rest.

[896] _a_] an F4.

[897] _maiden-widowed_] The hyphen inserted by Rowe.

[898] _cords_] _cordes_ Q2. _cord_ The rest.

[899] _here_] _heare_ Q3 Q4.

[900] [Exeunt.] Rowe. Exit. Qq Ff.

[901] SCENE III.] Rowe. SCENE V. Pope. SCENE VI. Capell.

Friar....] Capell. The Monastery. Rowe.

[902] Enter Friar Laurence.] Capell. Enter Frier. (Q1). Enter Frier and
Romeo. Qq Ff.

[903] _Romeo ... man_:] One line in (Q1) Qq. Two in Ff.

_man_:] _man_; [Enter Romeo. Capell.

[904] _Affliction_] _Aiffletion_ F3.

[905] Enter Romeo.] (Q1) Dyce.

[906] _Father ... doom?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[907] _acquaintance_] _admittance_ F4.

[908] _with_] in Rowe.

[909] _What ... doom?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[910] _gentler_] _gentle_ F4.

_vanish'd_] _vanisht_ (Q1) Qq Ff. _even'd_ Warburton. _issued_ Heath
conj.

[911] _Much ... death_] _Than death itself_ (Q1) Pope.

[912] _Here_] _Hence_ (Q1) Hanmer.

[913] _Verona_] _Verona's_ Pope.

[914] _torture, hell_] _torturing hell_ Hanmer. _Tartar, hell_
Warburton.

[915] _banished_] _banish'd_ Rowe.

_banish'd_] _blanisht_ Q2. _banished_ Rowe.

[916] _world's exile_] _world exilde_ (Q1). _world-exil'd_ Pope.

[917] _then ... mis-term'd_:] Omitted in (Q1) Pope.

[918] _then_] _that_ Theobald.

_banished_] _banishment_ Hanmer.

[919] _banished_] _banishment_ (Q1) Pope.

[920] _smilest_] _smil'st_ Q5 F3 F4.

[921] _rush'd_] _push'd_ Capell conj. and Long MS. _brush'd_ Collier MS.

[922] _This_] _That_ Rowe.

_dear_] _meere_ (Q1). _meer_ Pope.

[923] _Live_] _Lives_ Rowe.

[924] _blessing_] _blessings_ F4.

[925] _Who_] _Which_ Pope.

[926] _Who ... 'banished'?_] Put in the margin by Pope. See note (VIII).

[927] _as_] _and_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[928] But ... death?] See note (IX).

[929] _sharp-ground_] Hyphen inserted in F4. _sharpt ground_ F2.

[930] _Howling attends_] (Q1) Qq. _Howlings attends_ F1. _Howlings
attend_ F2 F3 F4.

[931] _sin-absolver_] Ff. _sin_ (or _sinne_) _obsolver_ Qq.

[932] _'banished'_] _banishment_ (Q1) Pope.

[933] _Thou ... word_] (Q1) Malone. _Then fond mad man, heare me a
little speake_ Q2 Q3. _Thou ... a little speake_ Q4 Q5. _Then fond
mad man, heare me speake_ F1. _Fond mad man, heare me speake_ F2 F3
F4 (_mad-man_ F4).

[934] _thee_] _the_ F2.

_keep off that_] _beare off this_ (Q1). _bear off that_ Pope.

[935] _more._] _more_: F2 F3 F4. _more_--Rowe.

[936] _madmen_] _mad man_ Q2.

[937] _How ... eyes?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_that_] Q2. om. Q3 Q4 Ff Q5.

_wise men_] Qq. _wisemen_ F1 F2. _wise-men_ F3 F4.

[938] _dispute_] (Q1) Qq. _dispaire_ F1 F2. _despair_ F3 F4.

[939] _thou_] [_yu_] F1. _tho_ F2.

[940] _Wert thou as young_] _If thou wert young_ Seymour conj.

_as I, Juliet thy_] (Q1) Qq. _as Juliet my_ Ff.

[941] _murdered_] _murdered_ (Q1) F2.

[942] _Then ... hair_] One line in (Q1) Rowe. Two in Qq Ff.

_mightst ... mightst_] (Q1) Q5. _mightest ... mightst_ Q2.
_mightest ... mightest_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _might'st ... might'st_ F3 F4.
(_milh'st_ F4).

[943] [Knocking within.] Throwing himself on the ground. Knock within.
Rowe. Enter Nurse, and knocke. Q2. Enter Nurse, and knockes. Q3 Ff.
Nurse knocks. Q4 Q5.

[944] _Arise ... thyself_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[945] Rom. _Not I ... arise_;] Omitted by Pope.

[946] _Not I_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[947] [Knocking.] They knocke. Q2 Q3. Knocke. Q4 Ff Q5.

[948] _Hark ... arise_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Who's_] _whose_ Q2 Q3.

[949] [Knocking.] Sludknock. Q2. Slud knock. Q3. Knocke againe. Q4 Q5.
Knocke. Ff.

[950] _simpleness_] _wilfulness_ (Q1) Pope.

[Knocking.] Knocke. Qq Ff.

[951] _Who ... will?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[952] Nurse [Within] Rowe. Nur. Qq Ff.

_Let ... errand_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_errand_] _errant_ Q2 Q3.

[953] Enter Nurse.] As in Rowe. Inserted after line 78 in Qq Ff.

[954] _Where is_] (Q1) Rowe. _Wheres_ Q2 Q3. _Where's_ Q4 F1 Q5 F3.
_Wher's_ F2 F4.

[955] _There ... drunk_] One line in (Q1) Pope. Two in Qq Ff.

[956] _mistress'_] Pope. _mistresse_ or _mistress_ Qq Ff. _mistress's_
Rowe.

_case_] _cause_ F2 F3.

[957] _O woeful ... predicament_] Given to 'Friar' by Steevens (Farmer
conj.). Continued to 'Nurse' in Qq Ff.

[958] _lies_] _liles_ F2.

[959] _Stand up ... stand_;] Omitted by Pope.

[960] _an you_] Rowe (ed. 2). _and you_ Qq Ff.

[961] _an O?_ Rom. Nurse] _an_--Rom. _Oh nurse_ Hanmer.

[962] _Well, death's_] (Q1) Malone. _deaths_ Q2 Q3 F1 F2 F3. _death's_
Q4 F4. _death is_ Q5.

[963] _Spakest_] Q2 Q3 Q4. _Spak'st_ Q5. _Speak'st_ Ff.

_is it_] _ist_ Q5. _is't_ F4.

[964] _she not_] (Q1) Q5. _not she_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff.

[965] _I have_] _have I_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_childhood_] _child-head_ Q5.

[966] _doth_] _does_ F4.

[967] _conceal'd_] _conseal'd_ Warburton.

_our cancell'd_] _our canceld_ (Q1) Qq. _our conceal'd_ Ff.

[968] _calls ... cries_] _cries ... calls_ (Q1) Pope.

_on_] om. F3 F4.

[969] _As if ... gun_] As in Rowe. One line in (Q1) Qq Ff.

[970] _dead'y_] _dead_ F1.

[971] _Murder'd_] _Murdered_ F3 F4.

_O_] om. Pope.

[972] _anatomy_] _anotamy_ F2.

[973] [Drawing his sword.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff. He offers to stab
himselfe, and Nurse snatches the dagger away. (Q1).

_hand_:] _hand._ [wresting the Dagger from him. Capell.

[974] _denote_] (Q1) Q4 F1 Q5. _denote_ Q2 Q3. _doe note_ F2. _do note_
F3 F4.

[975] _Unseemly ... both!_] Omitted by Pope.

[976] _Or_] (Q1) Steevens. _And_ Qq Ff. _An_ Warburton.

_both_] _groth_ Warburton (? for _growth_).

[977] _lady ... lives._] F4. _lady, that in thy life lies,_ Qq F1 F2
F3. _lady too, that lives in thee?_ (Q1) Pope.

[978] _By doing ... defence_] Omitted in (Q1) Pope.

[979] _rail'st_] _raylest_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[980] _do meet In thee at once_] _so meet, In thee atone_ Warburton.

[981] _lose_] Q5 F3 F4. _loose_ The rest.

[982] _Which_] _Who_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_a_] _an_ Q5 F4.

[983] _Digressing_] _Disgressing_ Q3 Q4.

[984] _in a_] _in the_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

[985] _a-fire_] Dyce. _afire_ Collier. _a fier_ Q2 Q3. _a fire_ Q4 Ff.
_on fire_ Q5.

[986] _slew'st ... too_] (Q1) F2 F3 F4. _slewest Tibalt, there art thou
happie_ Qq. _slew'st ... happie_ F1. _slew'st Tybalt; there thou'rt
happy too_ Pope.

[987] _becomes_] Qq. _became_ Ff.

[988] _turns_] _turnes_ Q2 Q4 Q5. _turne_ Q3. _turn'd_ Ff.

[989] _of blessings_] _of blessing_ Q3. _or blessing_ F1.

_lights_] (Q1) Q4. _light_ Q2 Q3 Ff Q5.

[990] _misbehaved and_] (Q1) Q4 Q5. _mishaued and_ Q2 Q3. _mishaped
and_ F1. _mis-shaped and a_ F2 F3. _misshapen and a_ F4. _mis-hav'd
and a_ Rowe.

[991] _pout'st upon_] _powts upon_ Q4. _poutst upon_ Q5. _puts up_ Q2
Q3. _puttest up_ Ff. _frownst upon_ (Q1). _poutest up_ Nicholson
conj.

[992] _the prince_] Q2 Q4 Q5. _thy prince_ Q3 Ff.

[993] _all the night_] Qq. _all night_ Ff. _all night long_ Pope.

[994] _learning_] _learaing_ Q4.

[995] _Here sir_] _Here is_ (Q1) Collier (ed. 2).

_bid_] Q2 Q3 Ff. _bids_ Q4 Q5.

[996] [Exit.] Capell, after _good night_, line 166. om. Qq Ff. Exit
Nurse. (Q1).

[997] _Go hence ... hence_:] Omitted in (Q1) Pope.

[998] _Go hence_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[999] _disguised_] _disguise_ Q2.

[1000] _Farewell_] om. Pope.

[1001] SCENE IV.] Rowe. SCENE VI. Pope. SCENE VII. Capell.

A room ...] Capell. Capulet's House. Rowe.

[1002] Enter ...] Rowe. Enter old Capulet, his wife and Paris. Qq Ff.

[1003] _had_] om. F3 F4.

[1004] _I promise ... ago_] Omitted by Pope.

[1005] _a-bed_] Rowe (ed. 2). _a bed_ Qq Ff.

[1006] _time_] (Q1) Rowe. _times_ Qq Ff.

_woo_] _woe_ Q4.

[1007] _I will ... heaviness_] Omitted in (Q1) Pope.

[1008] _she's mew'd_] Theobald. _shees mewed_ Q2. _she is mewed_ Q3
Q4 Ff Q5. _she is mew'd_ Rowe.

[1009] [calling him back. Capell.

_desperate_] _separate_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[1010] _be_] _me_ Q2.

[1011] _nay ...not_] _nay, I not doubt it_ Hanmer.

[1012] _here of_] Q4 F3 F4. _here, of_ Q2 F1 F2. _hereof_, Q3. _here
with_ Q5. _there with_ Keightley.

[1013] _next_--] Rowe. _next_, Qq Ff.

[1014] _Wednesday_] Q5 F3 F4. _Wendsday_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1. _Wensday_ F2.

[1015] _O' Thursday ... haste?_] _On Thursday let it be: you shall be
marry'd._ (Q1) Pope.

[1016] _O' ... o'_] Capell. _A ...a_ Qq Ff. _On ... o'_ Theobald.

[1017] _We'll keep_] _Well, keep_ Q2.

[1018] _there_] _there's_ Rowe.

[1019] _My lord_] As in (Q1) Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[1020] _o'_] Capell. _a_ Qq Ff. _on_ Pope.

[1021] [To Lady Capulet. Rowe.

[1022] _Afore ... so very very late ... by_] (Q1) Dyce. _Afore ...
so very late ... by_ Qq (in one line). _Afore ... so late ... by_
Ff (in one line). Omitted by Pope. _'Fore me ... so very late ... by_
Theobald (ending the lines _we ... night_). _'Fore me ... so late ...
by_ Johnson (ending the first line at _call_). _Now, afore ... so
very late ... by_ Capell, ending line 34 at _late._

[1023] _it_] _ir_ F1.

[1024] _Good night_] _Goodight_ F2.

[Exeunt.] Qq Ff. Exeunt, severally. Theobald.

[1025] SCENE V.] Rowe. SCENE VII. Pope. ACT IV. SCENE I. Capell.

Capulet's orchard.] The Garden. Rowe. Juliet's Chamber looking to the
Garden. Theobald. Anti-room of Juliet's Chamber. Capell.

[1026] Enter ... above, at the window.] Enter ... aloft. Qq Ff.
Enter ... at the window. (Q1). Enter ... above, at a Window; a Ladder of
Ropes set. Rowe.

[1027] _it ... day_:] Omitted in F2 F3 F4.

[1028] _yond_] Qq Ff. _yon_ (Q1) Warburton.

[1029] _of the_] of F2 F3 F4.

[1030] _jocund_] F4. _iocand_ Q2. _iocond_ or _jocond_ The rest.

[1031] _mountain_] _mountaines_ Q3 Q4 F1 Q5.

[1032] _Yond_] _Yon_ (Q1) F4.

_it, I_] _it well_ Pope. _it_ Johnson.

[1033] _sun_] _fen_ or _fens_ Anon. conj.

_exhales_] _exhale_ Q2 Q5.

[1034] _Therefore ... gone._] _Then stay a while, thou need'st not go
so soon_ Pope, from (Q1).

_stay yet; thou_] _stay yet, thou_ Qq F1 F2 F3. _stay yet thou_ F4.
_stay, yet thou_ Rowe.

_need'st not to be_] _needest not be_ Q5.

[1035] _Let me ... to go._] Put, with line 16, in the margin by Pope,
giving in the text the corresponding lines of (Q1).

[1036] _yon_] Qq Ff.

_the_] _the the_ Q2.

[1037] _brow_] _bow_ Collier (Collier MS. and Singer MS.).

[1038] _the_] om. F1.

[1039] _heaven_] _heavens_ F3 F4.

[1040] _care ... will_] _will ... care_ Johnson conj.

[1041] _How ... soul?_] _What says my love?_ (Q1) Pope.

_talk_:] _talke_ Q2 Q3. _talke_, or _talk_ The rest.

[1042] _loathed_] _loaded_ Warburton (a misprint).

_change_] _chang'd_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1043] _would they had_] _wot they have_ Hanmer. _wot they had_
Warburton (a misprint for _have_).

[1044] _Since ... day._] Omitted by Pope.

[1045] _hence_] _up_ Johnson.

[1046] _light it_] Qq. _itli ght_ F1. _it light_ F2 F3 F4.

[1047] Rom. _More ... woes!_] Omitted by (Q1) Pope, who inserts instead
l. 42, _Farewell ... descend._

_light: more_] _light, more_ Qq Ff. _light?--More_ Theobald.

[1048] Enter ... chamber.] Edd. Enter Madame and Nurse. Qq Ff. Enter
Nurse. Rowe. Enter Nurse, to the door. Capell.

[1049] _Nurse?_] Theobald. _Nurse._ Qq Ff.

[1050] [Exit.] Exit Nurse. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1051] _Then ... out_] Omitted by Pope. [opening it. Capell.

[1052] Rom. _Farewell ... descend_] Transferred to follow line 35 by
Pope.

[1053] [Descends.] Romeo descends. Theobald. He goeth downe. (Q1). om.
Qq Ff. Kisses her, and goes out of it. Capell.

[1054] _my ... friend_] (Q1) Boswell. _love, Lord, ay husband, friend_
Qq F1. _Love, Lord ah Husband, Friend_ F2 F3 F4. _my love! my lord! my
friend_ Malone. _love, lord! my husband, friend_ Grant White conj.

[1055] _day in the hour_] _hour in the day_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[Romeo comes down by the Ladder into the Garden. Rowe.

[1056] _Farewell ... opportunity_] As in Qq Ff. One line in Pope.

[1057] _think'st_] _thinkst_ Q2 Q5. _thinkest_ The rest.

[1058] _our time_] _our times_ Q2. _the time_ (Q1).

[1059] Jul.] Ro. Q2 Q3.

[1060] _thee, now_] Pope. _thee now_, Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff. _thee now_ Q5.

_below_] (Q1) Pope. _so lowe_ Qq Ff.

[1061] [Romeo descends. Pope.

[1062] _look'st_] _lookest_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1063] _my_] _mine_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1064] [Exit.] Exeunt. Rowe (ed. 2).

[1065] SCENE VI. Juliet's Chamber. Enter Juliet. Rowe. SCENE VIII. Pope.

[1066] _renown'd_] _renowmd_ Q2 Q3. _renowm'd_ Q4.

[1067] La. Cap. [within] L. C. [within. Capell. La. or Lad. Qq Ff.

[1068] _it is_] Qq. _is it_ Ff.

_mother!_] _mother._ Qq. _mother?_ Ff.

[1069] _Is ... early?_] Omitted by Pope.

[1070] _procures_] _provokes_ Hanmer.

_hither_] _either_ Q3. _hether_ Q4.

[1071] Enter Lady Capulet.] Capell. Enter Mother. Qq Ff (after line 64).

[1072] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[1073] _An if ... wit._] Omitted by (Q1) Pope.

[1074] _An_] Theobald. _And_ Qq Ff.

_couldst ... couldst_] _wouldst ... couldst_ Collier MS.

[1075] La. Cap.] Rowe. La. or Lad. Qq Ff (and elsewhere).

[1076] La. Cap. _So ... friend._] Omitted by Pope.

[1077] _weep_] _do weep_ Theobald.

_Feeling_] _But feeling_ or _In feeling_ Mommsen conj.

[1078] _slaughter'd_] _slaughtered_ Q3 Q4 Q5.

[1079] _same_] om. Hanmer.

[1080] [_Aside_] Hanmer.

_be_] _are_ (Q1) Pope.

[1081] _God ... girl._] See note (X).

[1082] _pardon_] _padon_ Q2.

_him_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. om. Q2 Q3 F1.

_with all_] _withall_ Q2 Q3.

[1083] _murderer_] Q2. om. Q3 Q4 Ff Q5.

[1084] _Shall ... dram_] _That shall bestow on him so sure a draught_
Steevens, from (Q1).

_unaccustom'd_] _accustom'd_ Q4.

[1085] _him--dead--_] Theobald. _him. Dead_ Qq Ff. _him--Dead_ Rowe.

[1086] _vex'd_] _vext_ Johnson.

[1087] _I would_] _I'd so_ Anon. apud Rann conj.

[1088] _love_] _tender love_ Anon. conj.

_bore_] _ever bore_ Lettsom conj. _bore unto_ Anon. conj.

_cousin_] Qq F1. _cousin, Tybalt_ F2 F3 F4. _slaughter'd cousin_
Theobald. _murder'd cousin_ Malone conj.

[1089] _slaughter'd_] _slaughtered_ Q3 Q4.

[1090] La. Cap.] Rowe. Mo. Qq Ff (and elsewhere).

[1091] _tidings_] _tiding_ Q4.

[1092] _needy_] _needful_ (Q1) Pope.

[1093] _I beseech_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _beseech_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[1094] _expect'st_] Rowe (ed. 2). _expects_ Qq Ff.

_look'd_] F4. _lookt_ Qq F1 F3. _looke_ F2.

[1095] _that_] Qq. _this_ F1 Ff.

[1096] _County_] _Count of_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_Saint_] _St._ F4.

[1097] _happily_] _happly_ Q3 Q4.

_there_] Qq. om. Ff.

[1098] _Saint_] _S._ Q2.

[1099] _should_] _must_ Q5.

_woo_] Q4. _wooe_ Q2 Q3 Q5 F4. _woe_ F1 F2 F3.

[1100] _I swear_,] Omitted by Pope, from (Q1).

[1101] _These ... indeed!_] Given to Lady Capulet by Collier (Collier
MS.).

[1102] La. Cap.] Mer. Q4.

[1103] _your_] _you_ F2.

[1104] Enter....] Enter Capulet, at a Distance; Nurse following.
Capell, after line 123.

[1105] _When ... downright._] Omitted by Pope.

[1106] _air_] _ayre_ Q4. _aire_ Q5. _earth_ Q2 Q3 Ff.]

_dew_] _daew_ F1.

[1107] _It ... tears?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[1108] _showering? In ... body_] Q5. _showring in ... body?_ Q2 Q3 Ff.
_showring: In ... body?_ Q4.

[1109] _Thou counterfeit'st a_] Q5. _Thou countefaits. A_ Q2. _Thou
counterfaits. A_ Q3. _Thou counterfeits, a_ Q4. _Thou counterfaits
a_ F1. _Thou counterfeits a_ F2. _Thy counterfeits a_ F3. _Thy
Counterfeit's a_ F4.

[1110] _is_] om. F2 F3 F4.

[1111] _Who_] _Which_ Pope.

_thy_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[1112] _wife_] _wise_ Q4.

[1113] _deliver'd_] Rowe (ed. 2). _delivered_ Qq Ff.

[1114] _Ay, sir_] Arranged as in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

_gives_] _give_ Q2.

_thanks._] _thankes._ Q5. _thanks?_ F4. _thankes_, Q2 Q3 F1 F2.
_thanks_, F3.

[1115] _How!_] _How?_ Q5. _How_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _How_, Ff.

[1116] _bridegroom_] _Bride_ Q2.

[1117] _Not ... that you have_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[1118] _hate_] Qq. _have_ Ff.

[1119] _that is meant_] _that's meant in_ Q5.

[1120] _How ... this?_] As one line in Qq. Two in Ff. Omitted in (Q1)
Pope.

_How, how! how, how!_] Capell. _How, how, howhow_, Q2. _How now, how
now,_ Q3 Q4. _How now? How now?_ Ff Q5.

_chop-logic_] Steevens (1793). _chop logicke_ (Q1). _chopt lodgick_ Q2
Q3 Q4. _chopt logicke_ F1 F2. _chopt logick_ Q5 F3 F4. _chop logick_
Theobald.

[1121] _'I thank ... proud:'_] _yet not proud, ... And yet, I thank
you,_ Lettsom conj.

[1122] _And ... you_,] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

_proud_:] Q4 Q5. _proud_ Q2 Q3.

_mistress_] _why, mistress_ Theobald. _come, mistress_ Anon. conj.

[1123] _fettle_] (Q1) Qq F1. _settle_ F2 F3 F4.

[1124] _Out ... tallow-face_] Omitted by Pope.

[1125] _green-sickness_] Hyphened in F4.

[1126] _You_] _Out you_ F4.

_tallow face_] Hyphened in F4.

[1127] Cap.] Fa. Qq Ff.

[1128] _thee_] _the_ F2.

_o'_] Theobald. _a_ Qq Ff.

[1129] _itch. Wife_,] _itch: Wife_, Q5. _itch, wife_, Q2 Q3 Q4. _itch,
wife_: Ff.

[1130] _lent_] _sent_ (Q1) Pope.

[1131] _curse_] _crosse_ (Q1). _cross_ Grant White conj.

[1132] _to blame_] _too blame_ Q3 F1 F2.

[1133] _gossips_,] Q3 Q4 Q5. _gossips_ Q2. _gossip_, Ff.

[1134] Cap. _O, God ye god-den._] Cap. _O, God-ye-good-den?_ Capell.
Cap: _Oh goddegodden._ (Q1). Fa. _O Godigeden._ Q4 Q5. _Father,
Ã´ Godigeden_, Q2 Q3 (as part of the Nurse's speech). _Father, O
Godigoden_, F1. _O Godigoden_, F2 F3. _O God gi' goode'en_ F4.

[1135] Nurse.] Q4 Q5. om. Q2 Q3 Ff.

_Peace_] _Peace, peace_ Theobald.

_mumbling_] _old mumbling_ Seymour conj.

[1136] _gossip's_] _goships_ Q2.

_bowl_] _bowles_ F1.

[1137] _God's bread ... company_] Qq Ff. _God's ... work and play ...
company_ Rowe (ed. 2). _God's ... mad: day, night, late, early, At
home, abroad; alone, in company, Waking or sleeping,_ Pope, from
(Q1). Malone, reading _early, late_, follows Pope. _As God's my
friend! it makes me mad: Day, night, hundreds of times, at work at
play, Alone, in company_ Bullock conj.

[1138] Johnson reads _It makes ... play_ as one line, omitting
_God's bread_ and _time_.

[1139] _tide_] _ride_ F1.

_time_] om. Keightley, reading _God's ... provided_ as three lines,
ending _tide, ... care ... provided_.

[1140] _noble_] _princely_ (Q1) Capell.

[1141] _demesnes_] _demeans_ F4. _demeanes_ The rest.

_train'd_] (Q1) Capell. _allied_ Q3 Q4 Ff Q5. _liand_ Q2. _'lianc'd_
Capell conj. _lined_ or _loin'd_ Mommsen conj.

[1142] _Proportion'd_] _Proportioned_ Q3 Q4.

_thought would_] _heart could_] (Q1) Capell.

[1143] _fortune's_] Theobald. _fortunes_ Qq Ff.

[1144] _an_] Capell. _and_ Qq Ff. _if_ Pope.

[1145] _An_] Capell. _And_ Qq Ff. _If_ Pope.

[1146] _starve_] _strave_ F1.

_in the_] _i' th'_ Pope.

[1147] _never_] _ever_ Q4 Q5.

[1148] _dim_] _dun_ Johnson (1771).

[1149] _O God_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[1150] _My ... me_] Omitted by Pope.

[1151] _Alack, alack_,] _Hlacke, alacke_ F1. _Alack!_ Hanmer.

[1152] _What ... nurse._] Omitted by Pope.

[1153] _Faith ... nothing_] As in Ff. One line in Qq. Capell ends the
first line at _Romeo_, reading _'tis_ and _banished_.

[1154] _and_] om. Pope.

[1155] _by_] _my_ Q4.

[1156] _county_] _count_ F2 F3 F4.

[1157] _O, he's_] _Oh, 'faith, he is_ Hanmer.

_gentleman!_] _gentleman! Romeo!_ Capell. _gentleman in sooth!_
Keightley. _lovely gentleman!_ Anon. conj.

[1158] _green_] _keen_ Hanmer.

[1159] _beshrew_] Q5 F4. _beshrow_ The rest.

[1160] _here_] _hence_ Hanmer. _there_ Anon. conj.

[1161] _Speakest_] _Speakst_ Q2.

[1162] _And ... else ... both_] Q2. _And ... or else ... both_ Q3 Q4
Q5. _And ... Or else ... both_ Ff (_to_, F4), as two lines.

_from_] om. Capell conj.

_too_] om. Hanmer.

_beshrew_] (Q1) Qq Ff.

[1163] _What?_] _To what?_ Hanmer. _What say you?_ Dyce conj.

[1164] _absolved_] _obsolu'd_ Q2.

[1165] [Exit.] om. Q2 Q3 F1. She lookes after Nurse. (Q1).

[1166] _wicked_] _wither'd_ S. Walker conj. _wrinkled_ Id. conj.
(withdrawn).

[1167] _Is it_] _It is_ F1.

[1168] _henceforth_] _henchforth_ F1 F2.

[1169] [Exit.] Qq. Exeunt. Ff.




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _Friar Laurence's cell._[1170]

               _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE _and_ PARIS.[1171]

    _Fri. L._ On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.

    _Par._ My father Capulet will have it so;
    And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.[1172]

    _Fri. L._ You say you do not know the lady's mind:
    Uneven is the course; I like it not.[1173]                         5

    _Par._ Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
    And therefore have I little talk'd of love,[1174]
    For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
    That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,[1175]                 10
    And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
    To stop the inundation of her tears,
    Which, too much minded by herself alone,
    May be put from her by society:
    Now do you know the reason of this haste.[1176]                   15

    _Fri. L._ [_Aside_] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.[1177]
    Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.[1178]

                            _Enter_ JULIET.

    _Par._ Happily met, my lady and my wife![1179]

    _Jul._ That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

    _Par._ That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.               20

    _Jul._ What must be shall be.

    _Fri. L._                     That's a certain text.

    _Par._ Come you to make confession to this father?

    _Jul._ To answer that, I should confess to you.[1180]

    _Par._ Do not deny to him that you love me.

    _Jul._ I will confess to you that I love him.                     25

    _Par._ So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.[1181]

    _Jul._ If I do so, it will be of more price,
    Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.[1182]

    _Par._ Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

    _Jul._ The tears have got small victory by that;                  30
    For it was bad enough before their spite.

    _Par._ Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

    _Jul._ That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,[1183]
    And what I spake, I spake it to my face.[1184]

    _Par._ Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.              35

    _Jul._ It may be so, for it is not mine own.
    Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
    Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

    _Fri. L._ My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
    My lord, we must entreat the time alone.[1185]                    40

    _Par._ God shield I should disturb devotion![1186]
    Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:[1187]
    Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.[1187][1188]      [_Exit._

    _Jul._ O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,[1189]
    Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help![1190]         45

    _Fri. L._ Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;[1191]
    It strains me past the compass of my wits:[1192]
    I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
    On Thursday next be married to this county.[1193]

    _Jul._ Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,[1194]       50
    Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
    If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
    Do thou but call my resolution wise,
    And with this knife I'll help it presently.[1195]
    God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;                  55
    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,[1196]
    Shall be the label to another deed,
    Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
    Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
    Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,[1197]                60
    Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
    'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
    Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that[1198]
    Which the commission of thy years and art[1199]
    Could to no issue of true honour bring.                           65
    Be not so long to speak; I long to die,[1200]
    If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

    _Fr. L._ Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
    Which craves as desperate an execution[1201]
    As that is desperate which we would prevent.                      70
    If, rather than to marry County Paris,
    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,[1202]
    Then is it likely thou wilt undertake[1203]
    A thing like death to chide away this shame,
    That copest with death himself to 'scape from it;[1204]           75
    And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.[1205]

    _Jul._ O, bid me leap, rather than many Paris,
    From off the battlements of yonder tower;[1206]
    Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk[1207]
    Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;[1207]            80
    Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,[1208]
    O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,[1209]
    With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;[1210]
    Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
    And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;[1211]                  85
    Things that to hear them told, have made me tremble;[1212]
    And I will do it without fear or doubt,
    To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.[1213]

    _Fri. L._ Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent[1214]
    To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow;[1214][1215]               90
    To-morrow night look that thou lie alone,[1214]
    Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:[1214][1216]
    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,[1214]
    And this distilled liquor drink thou off:[1217]
    When presently through all thy veins shall run                    95
    A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse[1218]
    Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:[1218]
    No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;[1219]
    The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade[1220]
    To paly ashes; thy eyes' windows fall,[1221]                     100
    Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;[1222]
    Each part, deprived of supple government,[1223]
    Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:[1223]
    And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death[1224]
    Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,                         105
    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:[1225]
    Then, as the manner of our country is,
    In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier[1226]                    110
    Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault[1227]
    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
    In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
    Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
    And hither shall he come: and he and I[1228]                     115
    Will watch thy waking, and that very night[1228]
    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
    And this shall free thee from this present shame,[1229]
    If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear[1230]
    Abate thy valour in the acting it.                               120

    _Jul._ Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear![1231]

    _Fri. L._ Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
    In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
    To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

    _Jul._ Love give me strength! and strength shall help
        afford.[1232]                                                125
    Farewell, dear father![1233]                          [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Hall in Capulet's house._[1234]

   _Enter_ CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, Nurse, _and two_ Servingmen.[1235]

    _Cap._ So many guests invite as here are writ.[1236]

                                                  [_Exit First Servant._

    Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.[1237]

    _Sec. Serv._ You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if[1238][1239]
    they can lick their fingers.[1239]

    _Cap._ How canst thou try them so?[1239]                           5

    _Sec. Serv._ Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick[1238][1239]
    his own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his fingers[1239]
    goes not with me.[1239]

    _Cap._ Go, be gone.[1239][1240][1241]          [_Exit Sec. Servant._
    We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.[1241]                 10
    What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?[1241]

    _Nurse._ Ay, forsooth.

    _Cap._ Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
    A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.[1242]

                            _Enter_ JULIET.

    _Nurse._ See where she comes from shrift with merry look.[1243]   15

    _Cap._ How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?[1244]

    _Jul._ Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin[1245]
    Of disobedient opposition
    To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd[1246]
    By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,                          20
    To beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you![1247]
    Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

    _Cap._ Send for the county; go tell him of this:[1248]
    I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

    _Jul._ I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell,                 25
    And gave him what becomed love I might,[1249]
    Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

    _Cap._ Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
    This is as't should be. Let me see the county;[1250]
    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.[1251]                 30
    Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,[1252]
    All our whole city is much bound to him.[1253]

    _Jul._ Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
    To help me sort such needful ornaments
    As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?                         35

    _La. Cap._ No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.[1254]

    _Cap._ Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.[1255]

                                             [_Exeunt Juliet and Nurse._

    _La. Cap._ We shall be short in our provision:[1256]
    'Tis now near night.

    _Cap._               Tush, I will stir about,
    And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:               40
    Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
    I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
    I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
    They are all forth: well, I will walk myself
    To County Paris, to prepare him up[1257]                          45
    Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,[1258]
    Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.[1259]       [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Juliet's chamber._[1260]

                      _Enter_ JULIET _and_ Nurse.

    _Jul._ Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
    I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night;
    For I have need of many orisons
    To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
    Which, well thou know'st, is cross and full of sin.[1261]          5

                      _Enter_ LADY CAPULET.[1262]

    _La. Cap._ What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?[1263][1264]

    _Jul._ No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
    As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:[1265]
    So please you, let me now be left alone,
    And let the nurse this night sit up with you,                     10
    For I am sure you have your hands full all
    In this so sudden business.

    _La. Cap._                  Good night:
    Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.

                                 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._[1266]

    _Jul._ Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.[1267]
    I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,                15
    That almost freezes up the heat of life:[1268]
    I'll call them back again to comfort me.[1269]
    Nurse!--What should she do here?[1270]
    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
    Come, vial.[1271][1272]                                           20
    What if this mixture do not work at all?[1271]
    Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?[1273]
    No, no: this shall forbid it. Lie thou there[1274]

                                                [_Laying down a dagger._

    What if it be a poison, which the friar
    Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,                           25
    Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
    Because he married me before to Romeo?
    I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
    For he hath still been tried a holy man.[1275]
    How if, when I am laid into the tomb,                             30
    I wake before the time that Romeo
    Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point.[1276]
    Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,[1277]
    To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,[1278]
    And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?[1279]                 35
    Or, if I live, is it not very like,[1280]
    The horrible conceit of death and night,
    Together with the terror of the place,[1281]
    As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
    Where for this many hundred years the bones[1282]                 40
    Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
    Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
    Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
    At some hours in the night spirits resort;
    Alack, alack, is it not like that I[1283]                         45
    So early waking, what with loathsome smells
    And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,[1284]
    That living mortals hearing them run mad:
    O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,[1285]
    Environed with all these hideous fears?[1286]                     50
    And madly play with my forefathers' joints?[1287]
    And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
    And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,[1288]
    As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
    O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost                         55
    Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body[1289]
    Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay![1289][1290]
    Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.[1291]

                   [_She falls upon her bed, within the curtains._[1292]


SCENE IV. _Hall in Capulet's house._[1293]

                _Enter_ LADY CAPULET _and_ Nurse.[1294]

    _La. Cap._ Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.[1295]

    _Nurse._ They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.[1296]

                         _Enter_ CAPULET.[1297]

    _Cap._ Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,[1298]
    The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:[1299]
    Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:                            5
    Spare not for cost.[1300][1301]

    _Nurse._            Go, you cot-quean, go,[1301]
    Get you to bed; faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
    For this night's watching.

    _Cap._ No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now[1302]
    All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.[1303]            10

    _La. Cap._ Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
    But I will watch you from such watching now.

                                 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._[1304]

    _Cap._ A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood![1305][1306]

 _Enter three or four_ Servingmen, _with spits, and logs, and baskets_.

                                           Now, fellow,
    What's there?[1305][1307]

    _First Serv._ Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.[1308]  15

    _Cap._ Make haste, make haste. [_Exit First Serv._] Sirrah, fetch
        drier logs:[1309]
    Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

    _Sec. Serv._ I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,[1310]
    And never trouble Peter for the matter.

    _Cap._ Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!                 20
    Thou shalt be logger-head. [_Exit Sec. Serv._] Good faith, 'tis
        day:[1311]
    The county will be here with music straight,
    For so he said he would. [_Music within_] I hear him near.[1312]
    Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say![1313]

                           _Re-enter_ Nurse.

    Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;                              25
    I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
    Make haste: the bridegroom he is come already:[1314][1315]
    Make haste, I say.[1315][1316]              [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _Juliet's chamber._[1317]

                          _Enter_ Nurse.[1318]

    _Nurse._ Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her,
        she:[1319]
    Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
    Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
    What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;[1320]
    Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,                   5
    The County Paris hath set up his rest
    That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,[1321]
    Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
    I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam![1322]
    Ay, let the county take you in your bed;                          10
    He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?[1323]

                                          [_Undraws the curtains._[1324]

    What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
    I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady![1325]
    Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
    O, well-a-day, that ever I was born![1326]                        15
    Some aqua-vitÃ¦, ho! My lord! my lady![1327]

                         _Enter_ LADY CAPULET.

    _La. Cap._ What noise is here?

    _Nurse._                       O lamentable day!

    _La. Cap._ What is the matter?

    _Nurse._                       Look, look! O heavy day![1328]

    _La. Cap._ O me, O me! My child, my only life,
    Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.                         20
    Help, help! call help.[1329]

                            _Enter_ CAPULET.

    _Cap._ For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

    _Nurse._ She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!

    _La. Cap._ Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead![1330]

    _Cap._ Ha! let me see her. Out, alas! she's cold;                 25
    Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff;
    Life and these lips have long been separated.
    Death lies on her like an untimely frost
    Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

    _Nurse._ O lamentable day![1331]

    _La. Cap._                 O woeful time![1332]                   30

    _Cap._ Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,[1332]
    Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.[1332][1333]

         _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE _and_ PARIS, _with_ Musicians.

    _Fri. L._ Come, is the bride ready to go to church?[1334]

    _Cap._ Ready to go, but never to return.
    O son, the night before thy wedding-day[1335]                     35
    Hath death lain with thy wife: see, there she lies,[1336]
    Flower as she was, deflowered by him.[1337]
    Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;[1338]
    My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,[1338]
    And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.[1338][1339]      40

    _Par._ Have I thought long to see this morning's face,[1340]
    And doth it give me such a sight as this?

    _La. Cap._ Accurst, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
    Most miserable hour that e'er time saw[1341]
    In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!                              45
    But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,[1342]
    But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
    And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight![1343]

    _Nurse._ O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
    Most lamentable day, most woeful day,                             50
    That ever, ever, I did yet behold![1344]
    O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
    Never was seen so black a day as this:
    O woeful day, O woeful day!

    _Par._ Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain![1345]          55
    Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,[1345]
    By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown![1345]
    O love! O life! not life, but love in death![1345]

    _Cap._ Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd![1345]
    Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now[1345]                     60
    To murder, murder our solemnity?[1345]
    O child! O child! my soul, and not my child![1345]
    Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead;[1345][1346]
    And with my child my joys are buried![1345]

    _Fri. L._ Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives
        not[1347][1348]                                               65
    In these confusions. Heaven and yourself[1347]
    Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,[1347]
    And all the better is it for the maid:[1347]
    Your part in her you could not keep from death;[1347]
    But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.[1347]                  70
    The most you sought was her promotion,[1347]
    For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:[1347][1349]
    And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced[1347]
    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?[1347][1350]
    O, in this love, you love your child so ill,[1347]                75
    That you run mad, seeing that she is well:[1347]
    She's not well married that lives married long,[1347]
    But she's best married that dies married young.[1347][1351]
    Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary[1347]
    On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,[1347]                  80
    In all her best array bear her to church:[1347][1352]
    For though fond nature bids us all lament,[1347]
    Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.[1347][1353]

    _Cap._ All things that we ordained festival,[1354]
    Turn from their office to black funeral:                          85
    Our instruments to melancholy bells;
    Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;[1355]
    Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
    Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
    And all things change them to the contrary.[1356]                 90

    _Fri. L._ Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;[1356]
    And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare[1356]
    To follow this fair corse unto her grave:[1356]
    The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;[1356]
    Move them no more by crossing their high will.[1356][1357]        95

                      [_Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris, and Friar._

    _First Mus._ Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.[1358]

    _Nurse._ Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up;
    For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.[1359]       [_Exit._

    _First Mus._ Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.[1360]

                             _Enter_ PETER.

    _Pet._ Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,
        Heart's[1361][1362][1363]                                    100
    ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'[1362][1364]

    _First Mus._ Why 'Heart's ease'?[1365]

    _Pet._ O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
    heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump, to[1366][1367]
    comfort me.[1367]                                                105

    _First Mus._ Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.[1368]

    _Pet._ You will not then?

    _First Mus._ No.[1369]

    _Pet._ I will then give it you soundly.

    _First Mus._ What will you give us?                              110

    _Pet._ No money, on my faith, but the gleek; I will[1370][1371]
    give you the minstrel.[1370][1371][1372]

    _First Mus._ Then will I give you the serving-creature.[1371]

    _Pet._ Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on[1371][1373]
    your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you, I'll
        fa[1371][1374]                                               115
    you; do you note me?[1374]

    _First Mus._ An you re us and fa us, you note us.[1375]

    _Sec. Mus._ Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out[1376]
    your wit.[1376]

    _Pet._ Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat[1377][1378]  120
    you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer[1378][1379]
    me like men:
            'When griping grief the heart doth wound[1380][1381]
            And doleful dumps the mind oppress,[1380][1382]
            Then music with her silver sound'--[1380]                125
    why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver sound'?--
    What say you, Simon Catling?

    _First Mus._ Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.[1383]

    _Pet._ Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?[1384]

    _Sec. Mus._ I say, 'silver sound,' because musicians             130
    sound for silver.

    _Pet._ Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?[1385]

    _Third Mus._ Faith, I know not what to say.

    _Pet._ O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will[1386]
    say for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,' because[1386]  135
    musicians have no gold for sounding:[1386][1387]
    'Then music with her silver sound[1388]
    With speedy help doth lend redress.'[1388][1389]               [_Exit._

    _First Mus._ What a pestilent knave is this same![1390]

    _Sec. Mus._ Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry[1391]     140
    for the mourners, and stay dinner. [_Exeunt._[1392]

FOOTNOTES:

[1170] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

Friar Laurence's cell.] Capell. The Monastery. Rowe.

[1171] Enter....] Rowe. Enter Frier and Countie Paris. Qq Ff (Count F2
F3 F4).

[1172] _nothing_] _something_ Collier conj.

_slow to slack his_] _slacke to slow his_ (Q1). _slow to back_
Johnson conj. _slack,--too slow's his_ Jackson conj.

[1173] _is_] _in_ Warburton.

[1174] _talk'd_] _talkt_ Q5. _talke_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2 Q5. _talk_ F3 F4.

[1175] _doth_] (Q1) Q3 Q4 F1 F2 Q5. _do_ Q2. _should_ F3 F4.

_sway_] _way_ Collier MS.

[1176] _haste._] Q2. _hast._ (Q1). _hast?_ or _haste?_ The rest.

[1177] [Aside] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1178] _toward_] Q2. _towards_ The rest.

[1179] _Happily met_] _Welcome my love_ (Q1) Pope.

_my wife_] _my life_ Johnson conj.

[1180] _I should_] _were to_ (Q1) Pope.

[1181] _ye_] _you_ Capell.

[1182] _Being_] _Benig_ F1.

[1183] _no_] om. Q4.]

_slander ... a truth_] _wrong, sir, that is but a truth_ Capell, from
(Q1). _wrong, sir, that that is a truth_ Jackson conj.

_a truth_] (Q1) Qq F1. _truth_ F2 F3 F4. _but truth_ Rowe.

[1184] _spake, I spake_] _speak, I speak_ F4.

_my_] _thy_ F4

[1185] _we_] (Q1) Qq. _you_ F1. _I_ F2 F3 F4.

[1186] _God shield I_] Q4. _Godshield, I_ Q2 Q3 Q5. _Godsheild: I_ F1
F2. _God shield: I_ F3. _God shield, I_ F4.

[1187] _Juliet ... kiss_] _Juliet farewel, and keep this holy kiss._
(Q1) Pope.

[1188] [Exit.] Qq. Exit Paris. Ff.

[1189] _O_,] _Go_ (Q1) Pope.

[1190] _cure_] (Q1) Q5. _care_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff.

[1191] _Ah_] (Q1) Capell. _O_ Qq Ff.

_thy_] _your_ Pope.

[1192] _It ... wits_] Omitted by Pope.

_strains_] _streames_ F1.

[1193] _county_] _count_ F2 F3 F4.

[1194] _hear'st_] Q5. _hearest_ The rest.

[1195] _with this_] _with' his_ F1. _with' this_ F2.

[1196] _Romeo's_] Q5. _Romeos_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _Romeo_ Ff.

[1197] _long-experienced_] _long-experienc'd_ Pope. _long experienst_
Q2 Q3. _long experien'st_ Q4 F2 F3. _long expetiens't_ F1. _long
experienc't_ Q5. _long experienc'd_ F4.

[1198] _umpire_] _umpeere_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[1199] _thy_] _my_ F3 F4.

[1200] _Be ... die_] _Speak not, be brief; for I desire to die_ (Q1)
Pope. _Speak now, be brief; for I desire to die_ Hanmer.

[1201] _an_] om. S. Walker conj.

[1202] _of will_] _or will_ (Q1) Pope.

_slay_] (Q1) Q4 Q5 F3 F4. _stay_ Q2 Q3 F1. _lay_ F2.

[1203] _is it_] _it is_ F3 F4.

[1204] _copest_] _coapst_ (Q1) Q2 Q3. _coop'st_ Q4 Q5. _coap'st_ F1 F2
F3. _cop'st_ F4. _copes_ Hanmer.

_from_] _fro_ F1 F2 F3.

_it_;] _it._ (Q1) Qq. _it_: Ff.

[1205] _And, if_] _An if_ Delius conj.

[1206] _off_] (Q1) Q5 F3 F4. _of_ The rest.

_yonder_] (Q1) Pope. _any_ Qq Ff.

[1207] _Or walk ... bears_] _Or chain me to some sleepy mountain's
top Where roaring bears and savage lions roam_ Pope, from (Q1). _Or
chain ... top Where savage bears and roaring lions roam_ Johnson
conj.

[1208] _shut_] (Q1) Pope. _hide_ Qq Ff.

[1209] _O'er-covr'd_] _Orecoverd_ Q2. _Orecovered_ Q3 F1 F2. _Ore
covered_ Q4 Q5. _Ore-covered_ F3. _O're-covered_ F4.

[1210] _reeky_] _reekie_ Qq. _reckie_ F1. _recky_ F2 F3 F4.

_yellow_] Q4 Q5 Ff. _yeolow_ (Q1). _yealow_ Q2 Q3.

_chapless_] _chapels_ Q2. _chappels_ Q3 F1.

[1211] _shroud_] Q4 Q5. _grave_ Ff. Omitted in Q2 Q3. _tomb_ Malone
conj.

[1212] _told_] _nam'd_ (Q1) Pope.

[1213] _unstain'd_] _unstained_ F1.

[1214] _Hold ... bed_] For these lines Pope substitutes three lines
_Hold ... vial_ from (Q1).

[1215] _Wednesday_] Q5 F4. _wendsday_ Q2. _wensday_ Q3 Q4 F1 F2 F3.

[1216] _thy nurse_] _the nurse_ Q2.

[1217] _distilled_] (Q1) Pope. _distilling_ Qq Ff.

[1218] _for ... surcease_] _which shall seize Each vital spirit; for
no pulse shall keep His nat'ral progress, but surcease to beat_
(Q1) Pope.

[1219] _breath_] _breast_ Q2.

[1220] _fade_] _fade_: Q2.

[1221] _To paly_] Q5. _Too paly_ Q4. _Too many_ Q2 Q3. _To many_ F1.
_To mealy_ F2 F3 F4.

_thy_] Q2 Q5. _the_ Q3 Q4 Ff.

[1222] _shuts_] _shut_ F1.

[1223] _Each part ... like death_] Omitted by Pope.

[1224] _borrow'd_] Q5. _borrowed_ The rest.

[1225] _thee_] _the_ F2.

[1226] _In_] _Is_ Q2.

_uncover'd_] _uncovered_ Q2.

_bier_] Hanmer. _beere, Be borne to buriall in thy kindreds grave:_
Qq Ff. (_beer ... born_ F3 F4). See note (IX).

[1227] _shalt_] _shall_ Q2.

[1228] _and ... waking_] Q3 Q4 Q5. _an ... walking_ Q2. Omitted in Ff.

[1229] _And ... shame_] Omitted by Pope.

[1230] _inconstant_] _unconstant_ F3 F4.

_toy_] _ioy_ Q4. _joy_ Q5.

[1231] _Give ... not me_] _Give me, oh give me, tell not me_ Pope.
_Give me, oh give me, tell me not_ Theobald. _O, give 't me, give
't me! tell not me_ Lettsom conj.

_fear_] _care_ F1.

[Taking the vial. Pope.

[1232] _Love ... afford_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1233] [Exeunt.] Q4 Q5. Exit. Q2 Q3 Ff. om. Rowe.

[1234] SCENE II.] Rowe. SCENE III. Capell.

Hall....] Capell. Capulet's House. Rowe.

[1235] Enter....] Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Serving men,
two or three. Qq Ff. Enter ... Servant. Malone.

[1236] [Exit....] to a Servant, who goes out. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1237] _twenty_] _dainty_ Jackson conj.

[1238] Sec. Serv.] Ser. Qq Ff. 1. S. Capell. 2. Serv. Malone.

[1239] Sec. Serv. _You ... gone._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[1240] [Exit....] Exit Servant. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1241] _Go ... Laurence?_] As in Theobald. Two lines, the first ending
_time_ in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[1242] _self-will'd_] _selfewield_ Q2. _selfe willde_ Q3.
_selfe-will'd_ Q4 Q5. _selfewild_ F1 F2. _self-wild_ F3 F4.

[1243] _See ... look._] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _shrift_,
in Ff.

_shrift ... look_] _her confession_ Pope, from (Q1).

[1244] _How ... gadding?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1245] _me_] om. Q4 Q5.

[1246] _enjoin'd_] _injoin'd_ Q5.

[1247] _To beg_] _And beg_ Pope.

[1248] _county_] _count_ F2 F3 F4.

[1249] _becomed_] Ff. _becomd_ Q2 Q3. _becommed_ Q4 Q5. _becoming_ Rowe.

[1250] _as't_] _ast_ Q2 Q3.

[1251] _hither_] _hether_ Q3.

[1252] _reverend holy_] _holy reverent_ (Q1). _holy reverend_ Q5.

[1253] _to him_] _to hymn_ Warburton conj. _unto_ (Q1) Steevens conj.

[1254] _there is_] _there's_ F1.

[1255] _Go ... to-morrow._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_to-morrow._] _to-Morrow?_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[Exeunt ... Nurse.] Ff. Exeunt. Qq.

[1256] _provision_] _privision_ Q5.

[1257] _him up_] Ff. _up him_ Qq.

[1258] _heart is_] _heart's_ Pope.

[1259] [Exeunt.] Q4 Q5. Exit. Q2 Q3. Exeunt Father and Mother. Ff.

[1260] SCENE III.] Rowe. SCENE IV. Capell.

Juliet's chamber.] Rowe.

[1261] _know'st_] Ff Q5. _knowest_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1262] Enter Lady Capulet.] Rowe. Enter Mother. Qq Ff.

[1263] La. Cap.] Mo. Qq Ff.

[1264] _ho? need you_] _do you need_ (Q1) Pope.

[1265] _behoveful_] F4. _behoofefull_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _behoovefull_ F1 F2 Q5.
_behooveful_ F3.

[1266] [Exeunt ... Nurse.] Capell. Exeunt. Qq Ff.

[1267] _Farewell!_] As in Qq. As a separate line in Ff.

[1268] _life_] Qq. _fire_ Ff.

[1269] _again_] om. F4.

[1270] _Nurse!--_] Hanmer. _Nurse--_ Rowe. _Nurse_; Q5. _Nurse_, The
rest.

[1271] _Come, vial! What_] As in Hanmer. In the same line in Qq Ff.
_Come, phial, come!_ Keightley, reading _Nurse ... come!_ as two lines,
the first ending _scene_.

[1272] _vial_] F4. _violl_ Q2. _viall_ The rest.

[1273] _Shall ... morning_] _Shall I of force be marry'd to the
Count_ Pope, from (Q1).

_then_] om. F4.

[1274] _it. Lie_] _it:--knife, lie_ Lettsom conj. from (Q1).

[Laying ...] Johnson. Pointing to a Dagger. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[1275] _a holy_] _an holy_ Q5.

_man._] _man: I will not entertain so bad a thought._ (Q1) Steevens.

[1276] _Come_] _Comes_ Pope.

[1277] _stifled_] _stiffled_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1278] _mouth_] _month_ Rowe.

[1279] _And ... comes?_] Omitted by Pope.

_die_] _be_ Theobald.

[1280]. _is it_] _it is_ Rowe.

[1281] _Together_] _Togither_ Q2.

[1282] _this_] Q2. _these_ The rest.

[1283] _Alack, alack_] _Alas, alas!_ Pope.

[1284] _shrieks_] F4. _shrikes_ The rest.

_mandrakes'_] Malone (Capell's Errata). _mandrakes_ Qq Ff. _mandrake's_
Johnson.

[1285] _O, if I wake_] Hanmer. _O if I walke_ Q2 Q3 F1. _Or if I
wake_ Q4 Q5. _Or if I walke_ F2. _Or if I walk_ F3 F4.

[1286] _Environed_] _Inviron'd_ F4. _Invironed_ The rest.

[1287] _joints_] _ioynes_ Q4.

[1288] _great kinsman's_] _great-kinsman's_ Delius conj.

[1289] _that ... point_] Omitted by Pope, from (Q1).

[1290] _a_] Qq. _my_ F1. _his_ F2 F3 F4.

_stay!_] _stay Romeo,--_ or _stay,--Romeo_, Nicholson conj.

[1291] _Romeo, ... thee_] (Q1) Pope. _Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, heeres
drinke, I drinke to thee._ Qq Ff, substantially, (_Rome, Romeo,
Romeo_, F2). _Romeo, here's drink! Romeo, I drink to thee._ Johnson.
_Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, I drink to thee._ Knight (Stratford Ed.). See
note (XI).

_I come, this do_] _Romeo, here's drink_ Nicholson conj.

[1292] She ... curtains.] (Q1) Edd. She throws herself on the bed.
Pope. Omitted in Qq Ff. Exit. Rowe. Drinks; throws away the Vial, and
casts herself upon the Bed. Scene closes. Capell.

[1293] SCENE IV.] Rowe. SCENE V. Capell.

Hall ...] A Hall. Rowe. Capulet's Hall. Theobald.

[1294] Lady Capulet] Rowe. Lady of the house, Qq Ff.

[1295] _Hold_,] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

[1296] [Exit Nurse. Singer.

[1297] Enter Capulet.] Rowe. Enter old Capulet. Qq Ff. Enter Capulet,
hastily. Capell.

[1298] _Come ... crow'd_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_crow'd_] Ff. _crowed_ Qq.

[1299] _rung_] _roong_ Q2. _roung_ Q3 Q4.

_o'clock_] Theobald. _a clock_ Qq Ff.

[1300] Nurse.] La. Cap. Singer.

_Go_] _Go, go_ Theobald.

[1301] _go, Get_] _go.--_[To Cap.] _Get_ Hunter conj.

[1302] _what!_] om. F4.

[1303] _lesser_] Q2. _lesse_ Q3 Q4 F1 Q5. _a lesse_ F2 F3. _a less_ F4.

[1304] [Exeunt ...] Exit Lady and Nurse. Qq Ff. Exit Lady Capulet.
Singer.

[1305] _A ... there?_] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Qq. Two, the
second beginning _Now_, in Ff.

[1306] _jealous-hood_] Hyphen inserted in F4.

Servingmen] om. Qq Ff.

[1307] _What's_] _whats_ F2. _what's_ F3 F4. _what is_ Qq. _what_ F1.

[1308] First Ser.] 1. S. Capell. Fel. Qq Ff. Ser. Rowe.

[1309] _haste._ [Exit ...] _haste._ [Exit Ser. Capell. _haste_ Q2 Q3
Q4. _haste_, Ff. _haste_; Q5.

[1310] Sec. Ser.] 2. S. Capell. Fel. Qq Ff. Ser. Rowe.

[1311] [Exit Sec. Serv.] Edd. Exit. Capell (after line 19). om. Qq Ff.

_faith_] Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _father_ Q2 Q3 F1.

[1312] [Music within.] Capell, after line 22. Play Musicke. (after line
21) Qq Ff. Play Musick. (after line 23) Hanmer.

[1313] Re-enter Nurse.] Dyce. Enter Nurse. Qq Ff.

[1314] _Make ... already_:] Omitted by Rowe and Pope.

[1315] _Make ... say._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[1316] [Exeunt.] Capell. Ex. Capulet and Nurse, severally. Theobald.
Exit Capulet. Rowe. Omitted in Qq Ff.

[1317] SCENE V.] Pope. SCENE VI. Capell.

Juliet's Chamber.] Juliet's Chamber, Juliet on a bed. Theobald. Scene
draws and discovers Juliet on a Bed. Rowe. Anti-room of Juliet's
Chamber. Door of the Chamber open, and Juliet upon her Bed. Capell.

[1318] Enter Nurse.] Hanmer. Re-enter Nurse. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1319] _she_] om. F2 F3 F4.

[1320] _pennyworths_] _penniworth_ Q5.

[1321] _shall_] _should_ Rowe.

_little. God ... me_,] _little: ... me_ Q5. _little, ... me._ Q2 Q3 Q4.
_little, ... me_: Ff.

[1322] _needs must_] Q2. _must needs_ The rest.

[goes towards the Bed. Capell.

[1323] _fright_] _ferret_ Long MS.

[1324] [Undraws the curtains.] Capell.

[1325] _wake_] _awake_ Rowe.

[shaking her. Capell.

[1326] _well-a-day_] _wereaday_ Q2. _weleaday_ Q3. _weary day_ Anon.
conj.

[1327] Enter Lady Capulet.] Enter Mother. (Q1) Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1328] _Look, look_] _Look_ Pope.

[1329] Enter Capulet.] Rowe. Enter Father. Qq Ff.

[1330] La. Cap. _Alack ... dead!_] Omitted by Pope.

[1331] _all_] om. Rowe.

_field._] _field. Accursed time! unfortunate old man!_ Pope, from
(Q1).

[1332] _Nurse. O ... speak._] Omitted by Pope.

[1333] Enter ...] Enter Frier and the Countie, with the Musitians. Q4.
Enter ... County, with Musicians. Q5. Enter Frier and the Countie. Q2
Q3 Ff.

[1334] Fri. L.] Par. (Q1) Staunton.

[1335] _thy_] _the_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1336] _wife_] _bride_ (Q1) Steevens (1778).

_see_] F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1. See note (XII).

[1337] _deflowered_] Steevens (1793). _deflowred_ Qq F1. _deflowred
now_ F2. _deflowr'd now_ F3 F4. _deflowered now_ Johnson.

[1338] _death is my heir ... Death's_] Omitted by Pope.

[1339] _all; life, living._] Collier. _all life living,_ Q2 Q3 Ff.
_all, life, living_, Q4 Q5. _all; live leaving_, Capell.

[1340] _long_] _loue_ Q2.

[1341] _e'er time_] _time e'er_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1342] _one poor and_] _one dear and_ S. Walker conj.

_loving_] _living_ Johnson (1771).

[1343] _catch'd_] _snatch'd_ Capell conj.

[1344] _behold_] _bedold_ Q2.

[1345] Par. _Beguiled ... buried_] Omitted by Pope.

[1346] _Dead art thou!_] _Dead art thou! dead;_ Theobald. _Dead,
dead, art thou!_ Malone conj.

[1347] See note (XIII).

[1348] _confusion's cure_] Theobald. _confusions care_ Q2. _confusions,
care_ Q3 Q4 Q5. _confusions: care_ Ff. _confusions? care_ Rowe.

_lives_] _lies_ Lettsom conj.

[1349] _she_] _that she_ F2 F3 F4.

[1350] _itself_] _himselfe_ Q5.

[1351] _But ... young_] Omitted in Johnson (1771).

_dies married_] _dies unmarried_ Theobald conj.

[1352] _In all_] Capell, from (Q1). _And in_ Qq Ff. _All in_ Rowe.

[1353] _fond_] F2 F3 F4. _some_ Qq F1.

_us all_] Qq. _all us_ Ff.

[1354] _ordained_] _ordain'd for_ Anon. conj.

[1355] _burial_] _funerall_ Q5.

[1356]. _And all ... will._] Omitted by Pope.

[1357] [Exeunt....] Theobald. Exeunt manet. Q2 Q3. Exeunt manent
Musici. Q4. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt. Manent Musici. Q5. They all but the
Nurse goe foorth, casting Rosemary on her and shutting the Curtens.
Enter Musitions. (Q1).

[1358] SCENE VI. Pope.

First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Musi. Qq. Mu. Ff.

[1359] _pitiful_] _piteous_ Steevens conj.

[Exit.] Exit Nurse. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1360] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Fid. Qq. Mu. Ff.

_by my_] _my my_ Q2.

[Exit omnes. Q2. Exeunt omnes. Q3 Q4 Q5.

Enter Peter.] Q4 Ff Q5. Enter Will Kemp. Q2. Enter Will Kempe. Q3.
Enter Servingman. (Q1). Enter another Servant. Capell.

[1361] Pet.] Q4 Ff. Peter. Q2 Q3. Pe. Q5. Ser. Capell.

[1362] _Musicians ... ease._] Prose by Pope. Two lines in Qq. Three in
Ff.

[1363] _Heart's ... Heart's_] _harts ... harts_ Q2 Q3. _hatts ...
harts_ Q4.

[1364] _an you_] Pope. _and you_ Qq Ff.

_play_] _why, play_ Johnson.

_Heart's_] _harts_ Q2.

[1365] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Fidler. Q2 Q3 Q4. Mu. Ff. Fid. Q5.

[1366] _of woe_] Q4 Q5. Omitted in Q2 Q3 Ff.

[1367] _O ... comfort me._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1368] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Minstrels. Q2 Q3 Q4. Mu. Ff. Min. Q5.

[1369] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Minst. Q2. Min. Q3 Q4 Q5. Mu. Ff, and
similarly in 110, 113, 117.

[1370] _No ... minstrel._] Prose first by Theobald. Two lines in Qq Ff.

[1371] _but ... crotchets_:] Omitted by Pope.

[1372] _minstrel_] _ministrell_ F2 F3. _ministrel_ F4.

[1373] _lay_] _say_ Q4.

[1374] _I will ... note me?_] Prose in Q4 Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _fa_, in Q2 Q3. Two lines, the first ending _fa you_, in Q5.

[1375] _An_] Pope. _And_ Ff.

[1376] _Pray ... your wit._] Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[1377] _Then ... wit!_] Given to Peter in Q4 Q5. Continued to Sec. Mus.
in Q2 Q3 Ff.

[1378] _I will ... dagger._] Omitted by Pope.

[1379] _an iron wit_] _my iron wit_ Collier MS.

[1380] _When ... sound--_] Verse in (Q1). Prose in Qq Ff.

[1381] _grief_] Hanmer. _griefe_ (Q1). _griefes_ Qq F1 F2. _griefs_ F3
F4.

[1382] And ... oppress,] (Q1) Capell. Omitted in Qq Ff.

[1383] First Mus.] 1. (Q1). 1. Mus. Johnson. Minst. Q2. Min. Q3 Q4 Q5.
Mu. Ff.

[1384] _Pretty!_] Pope. _Pretie_, (Q1). _Prates_, Q2. _Pratest_, Q3 Ff.
_Pratee_, Q4 Q5. _Pratest?_ Rowe. _Thou pratest_: Collier (Collier MS.).

_Rebeck_] Rowe. _Rebick_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F3 F4. _Rebicke_ F1 F2 Q5.

[1385] _Pretty too!_] Pope, from (Q1). _Prates to_, Q2. _Pratest to_,
Q3 F1 F2. _Pratee to_, Q4. _Pratee too_: Q5. _Pratest too,_ F3 F4.
_Thou pratest too_: Collier (Collier MS.).

_James Soundpost_] _Samuel Sound-board_ Pope.

[1386] _O ... sounding_:] Prose in Pope. Three lines in Qq Ff.

[1387] _musicians_] _such fellows as you_ (Q1) Pope.

_no gold_] _seldom gold_ (Q1) Capell.

[1388] _Then ... redress._] Omitted by (Q1) Pope. Two lines by Johnson.
One in Q2 Q3 Q4. Prose in Ff Q5. _The music ... sound Doth lend
redress._ Theobald.

[1389] [Exit.] Exit, singing. Theobald.

[1390] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Min. Qq. Mu. Ff.

[1391] _him, Jack!_] Hanmer. _him Iacke,_ or _him Jack_, Qq Ff.
_him.--Jack_, Johnson.

[1392] [Exeunt.] (Q1) Q4 Q5. Exit. The rest.




ACT V.


SCENE I. _Mantua. A street._[1393]

                             _Enter_ ROMEO.

    _Rom._ If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,[1394]
    My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
    My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,[1395]
    And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit[1396]
    Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.                  5
    I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
    Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!--[1397]
    And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
    That I revived and was an emperor.
    Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,                        10
    When but love's shadows are so rich in joy![1398]

                      _Enter_ BALTHASAR, _booted_.

    News from Verona! How now, Balthasar!
    Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
    How doth my lady? Is my father well?
    How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;[1399]                      15
    For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

    _Bal._ Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:[1400]
    Her body sleeps in Capels' monument,[1401]
    And her immortal part with angels lives.[1402]
    I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,                        20
    And presently took post to tell it you:
    O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
    Since you did leave it for my office, sir.[1403]

    _Rom._ Is it e'en so? then I defy you, stars![1404]
    Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,[1405]              25
    And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

    _Bal._ I do beseech you, sir, have patience:[1400][1406]
    Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
    Some misadventure.

    _Rom._             Tush, thou art deceived:
    Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.                         30
    Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

    _Bal._ No, my good lord.[1400][1407]

    _Rom._                   No matter: get thee gone,[1408]
    And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.

                                                      [_Exit Balthasar._

    Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
    Let's see for means:--O mischief, thou art swift                  35
    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men![1409]
    I do remember an apothecary,
    And hereabouts a' dwells, which late I noted[1410]
    In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
    Culling of simples; meagre were his looks;                        40
    Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
    And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,[1411]
    An alligator stuff'd and other skins
    Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
    A beggarly account of empty boxes,[1412]                          45
    Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
    Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
    Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.[1413]
    Noting this penury, to myself I said,
    An if a man did need a poison now,[1414]                          50
    Whose sale is present death in Mantua,[1415]
    Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
    O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
    And this same needy man must sell it me.
    As I remember, this should be the house:                          55
    Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
    What, ho! apothecary![1416]

                          _Enter_ Apothecary.

    _Ap._                 Who calls so loud?

    _Rom._ Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor;
    Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
    A dram of poison; such soon-speeding gear[1417]                   60
    As will disperse itself through all the veins,
    That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
    And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
    As violently as hasty powder fired
    Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.                          65

    _Ap._ Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
    Is death to any he that utters them.

    _Rom._ Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
    And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,[1418]
    Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,[1419]                   70
    Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back,[1420]
    The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law:
    The world affords no law to make thee rich;
    Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

    _Ap._ My poverty, but not my will, consents.                      75

    _Rom._ I pay thy poverty and not thy will.[1421]

    _Ap._ Put this in any liquid thing you will,
    And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
    Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

    _Rom._ There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,[1422]      80
    Doing more murder in this loathsome world,[1423]
    Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell:[1424]
    I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
    Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.[1425]
    Come, cordial and not poison, go with me                          85
    To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.             [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Friar Laurence's cell._[1426]

                       _Enter_ FRIAR JOHN.[1427]

    _Fri. J._ Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho![1428]

                        _Enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE.

    _Fri. L._ This same should be the voice of Friar John.
    Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
    Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.[1429]

    _Fri. J._ Going to find a bare-foot brother out,                   5
    One of our order, to associate me,
    Here in this city visiting the sick,[1430]
    And finding him, the searchers of the town,[1430]
    Suspecting that we both were in a house
    Where the infectious pestilence did reign,                        10
    Seal'd up the doors and would not let us forth;
    So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.[1431]

    _Fri. L._ Who bare my letter then to Romeo?[1432]

    _Fri. J._ I could not send it,--here it is again,--[1433]
    Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,                             15
    So fearful were they of infection.

    _Fri. L._ Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
    The letter was not nice, but full of charge[1434]
    Of dear import, and the neglecting it
    May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;                         20
    Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
    Unto my cell.

    _Fri. J._ Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.[1435]      [_Exit._

    _Fri. L._ Now must I to the monument alone;
    Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake:[1436]              25
    She will beshrew me much that Romeo
    Hath had no notice of these accidents;
    But I will write again to Mantua,
    And keep her at my cell till Romeo come:
    Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!         [_Exit._  30


SCENE III. _A churchyard; in it a monument belonging to the
Capulets._[1437]

   _Enter_ PARIS _and his_ Page, _bearing flowers and a torch_.[1438]

    _Par._ Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:[1439]
    Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
    Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,[1440]
    Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;[1441]
    So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,                        5
    Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
    But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
    As signal that thou hear'st something approach.[1442]
    Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

    _Page._ [_Aside_] I am almost afraid to stand alone[1443]         10
    Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.[1444]        [_Retires._

    _Par._ Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--[1445][1446]
      O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--[1446][1447]
    Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,[1447][1448]
      Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:[1447]          15
    The obsequies that I for thee will keep[1447]
    Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.[1447][1449]

                                                   [_The Page whistles._

    The boy gives warning something doth approach.
    What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,[1450]
    To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?[1451]                 20
    What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.[1452]       [_Retires._

   _Enter_ ROMEO _and_ BALTHASAR, _with a torch, mattock, &c._[1453]

    _Rom._ Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.[1454]
    Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
    See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
    Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,                  25
    Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,[1455]
    And do not interrupt me in my course.
    Why I descend into this bed of death
    Is partly to behold my lady's face,
    But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger                   30
    A precious ring, a ring that I must use
    In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
    But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
    In what I farther shall intend to do,[1456]
    By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint                        35
    And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
    The time and my intents are savage-wild,[1457]
    More fierce and more inexorable far
    Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

    _Bal._ I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.[1458][1459]      40

    _Rom._ So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou[1460]
    that:
    Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.[1458]

    _Bal._ [_Aside_] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:[1461]
    His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.[1462]       [_Retires._

    _Rom._ Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,[1463]             45
    Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
    Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
    And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.[1464]

                                                      [_Opens the tomb._

    _Par._ This is that banish'd haughty Montague
    That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,[1465]           50
    It is supposed, the fair creature died,
    And here is come to do some villanous shame
    To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.[1466]

                                                       [_Comes forward._

    Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague![1467]
    Can vengeance be pursued further than death?                      55
    Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:[1468]
    Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

    _Rom._ I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.
    Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;[1469]
    Fly hence and leave me: think upon these gone;[1470]              60
    Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
    Put not another sin upon my head,[1471]
    By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
    By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
    For I come hither arm'd against myself:                           65
    Stay not, be gone: live, and hereafter say,[1472]
    A madman's mercy bid thee run away.[1472][1473]

    _Par._ I do defy thy conjurations[1474]
    And apprehend thee for a felon here.

    _Rom._ Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy![1475]        70

                                                          [_They fight._

    _Page._ O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.[1476]

                                                                [_Exit._

    _Par._ O, I am slain! [_Falls._] If thou be merciful,[1477]
    Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.[1478]          [_Dies._

    _Rom._ In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face:[1479]
    Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris![1480]                     75
    What said my man, when my betossed soul
    Did not attend him as we rode? I think
    He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
    Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
    Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,                          80
    To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
    One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
    I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
    A grave? O, no, a lantern, slaughter'd youth;[1481]
    For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes[1482]                  85
    This vault a feasting presence full of light.[1482]
    Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.[1482][1483]

                                        [_Laying Paris in the monument._

    How oft when men are at the point of death[1482]
    Have they been merry! which their keepers call[1482]
    A lightning before death: O, how may I[1482][1484]                90
    Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife![1482]
    Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,[1485]
    Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
    Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet[1486]
    Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,                         95
    And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
    Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
    O, what more favour can I do to thee
    Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
    To sunder his that was thine enemy?[1487]                        100
    Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
    Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe[1488]
    That unsubstantial death is amorous,[1488]
    And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
    Thee here in dark to be his paramour?                            105
    For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,
    And never from this palace of dim night[1489]
    Depart again: here, here will I remain[1490]
    With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
    Will I set up my everlasting rest,                               110
    And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
    From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last![1491]
    Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
    The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
    A dateless bargain to engrossing death!                          115
    Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide![1492]
    Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
    The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark.[1493]
    Here's to my love! [_Drinks._] O true apothecary![1494]
    Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.[1495]       [_Dies._  120

 _Enter, at the other end of the churchyard_, FRIAR LAURENCE, _with a_
                   _lantern, crow, and spade_.[1496]

    _Fri. L._ Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night[1497]
    Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?[1498]

    _Bal._ Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.[1499]

    _Fri. L._ Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
    What torch is yond that vainly lends his light                   125
    To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,[1500]
    It burneth in the Capels' monument.[1501]

    _Bal._ It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,[1502]
    One that you love.[1502][1503]

    _Fri. L._          Who is it?

    _Bal._                        Romeo.[1502]

    _Fri. L._ How long hath he been there?[1502]

    _Bal._                                 Full half an hour.[1502]  130

    _Fri. L._ Go with me to the vault.[1502]

    _Bal._                             I dare not, sir:
    My master knows not but I am gone hence;
    And fearfully did menace me with death,
    If I did stay to look on his intents.[1504]

    _Fri. L._ Stay, then; I'll go alone: fear comes upon me;[1505]   135
    O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.[1506]

    _Bal._ As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,[1502][1507][1508]
    I dreamt my master and another fought,[1507]
    And That my master slew him.[1507]

    _Fri. L._               Romeo![1509]      [_Advances._
    Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains                   140
    The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
    What mean these masterless and gory swords
    To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?[1510] [_Enters the tomb._
    Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
    And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour[1511]              145
    Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
    The lady stirs.[1512]                         [_Juliet wakes._

    _Jul._ O comfortable friar! where is my lord?[1513]
    I do remember well where I should be,
    And there I am: where is my Romeo?[1514]        [_Noise within._  150

    _Fri. L._ I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest[1515]
    Of death, contagion and unnatural sleep:
    A greater power than we can contradict
    Hath thwarted our intents: come, come away:[1516]
    Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;                        155
    And Paris too: come, I'll dispose of thee
    Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
    Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
    Come, go, good Juliet; I dare no longer stay.[1517]

    _Jul._ Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.[1518]            160

                                                         [_Exit Fri. L._

    What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?[1519]
    Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
    O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop[1520]
    To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
    Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,                         165
    To make me die with a restorative.       [_Kisses him._[1521]
    Thy lips are warm.

    _First Watch._ [_Within_] Lead, boy: which way?[1522]

    _Jul._ Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger![1523]

                                            [_Snatching Romeo's dagger._

    This is thy sheath [_Stabs herself_]; there rust, and let me die.

                               [_Falls on Romeo's body, and dies._[1524]

            _Enter_ Watch, _with the_ Page _of_ PARIS.[1525]

    _Page._ This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.[1526]  170

    _First Watch._ The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:[1527]
    Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.[1528]
    Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain;
    And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
    Who here hath lain this two days buried.[1529]                   175
    Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
    Raise up the Montagues: some others search:[1530][1531]
    We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;[1530][1532]
    But the true ground of all these piteous woes[1530][1532]
    We cannot without circumstance descry.[1532][1533]               180

            _Re-enter some of the_ Watch, _with_ BALTHASAR.

    _Sec. Watch._ Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.[1534]

    _First Watch._ Hold him in safety, till the prince come
        hither.[1535][1536]

           _Re-enter_ FRIAR LAURENCE, _and another_ Watchman.

    THIRD WATCH. Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
    We took this mattock and this spade from him,
    As he was coming from this churchyard's side.[1537]              185

    _First Watch._ A great suspicion: stay the friar too.[1535][1538]

                  _Enter the_ Prince _and_ Attendants.

    _Prince._ What misadventure is so early up,[1539]
    That calls our person from our morning rest?[1540]

           _Enter_ CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, _and others_.[1541]

    _Cap._ What should it be that they so shriek abroad?[1542]

    _La. Cap._ The people in the street cry Romeo,[1543][1544]       190
    Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
    With open outcry toward our monument.[1545]

    _Prince._ What fear is this which startles in our ears?[1546]

    _First Watch._ Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;[1547]
    And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,                         195
    Warm and new kill'd.

    _Prince._ Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.[1548]

    _First Watch._ Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's
        man,[1547][1549]
    With instruments upon them fit to open
    These dead men's tombs.[1550]                                    200

    _Cap._ O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds![1551]
    This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house[1552]
    Is empty on the back of Montague,[1552]
    And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom![1552][1553]

    _La. Cap._ O me! this sight of death is as a bell                205
    That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

                  _Enter_ MONTAGUE _and others_.[1554]

    _Prince._ Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
    To see thy son and heir more early down.[1555]

    _Mon._ Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
    Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:[1556]           210
    What further woe conspires against mine age?[1557]

    _Prince._ Look, and thou shalt see.[1558]

    _Mon._ O thou untaught! what manners is in this,[1559]
    To press before thy father to a grave?

    _Prince._ Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,[1560]        215
    Till we can clear these ambiguities
    And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
    And then will I be general of your woes
    And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
    And let mischance be slave to patience.                          220
    Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

    _Fri. L._ I am the greatest, able to do least,
    Yet most suspected, as the time and place
    Doth make against me, of this direful murder;[1561]
    And here I stand, both to impeach and purge[1562]                225
    Myself condemned and myself excused.

    _Prince._ Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

    _Fri. L._ I will be brief, for my short date of breath
    Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
    Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;                   230
    And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:[1563]
    I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
    Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death[1564]
    Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
    For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.                      235
    You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
    Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
    To County Paris: then comes she to me,
    And with wild looks bid me devise some mean[1565]
    To rid her from this second marriage,                            240
    Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
    Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
    A sleeping potion; which so took effect
    As I intended, for it wrought on her
    The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,[1566]               245
    That he should hither come as this dire night,[1567]
    To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,[1568]
    Being the time the potion's force should cease.
    But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
    Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight                          250
    Return'd my letter back. Then all alone[1569]
    At the prefixed hour of her waking[1570]
    Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,
    Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
    Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:                         255
    But when I came, some minute ere the time[1571]
    Of her awaking, here untimely lay[1572]
    The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
    She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,[1573]
    And bear this work of heaven with patience:                      260
    But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,[1574]
    And she too desperate would not go with me,
    But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
    All this I know; and to the marriage[1575]
    Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this[1575][1576]            265
    Miscarried by my fault, let my old life[1575]
    Be sacrificed some hour before his time[1575][1577]
    Unto the rigour of severest law.

    _Prince._ We still have known thee for a holy man.[1578]
    Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?[1579]              270

    _Bal._ I brought my master news of Juliet's death,[1580]
    And then in post he came from Mantua
    To this same place, to this same monument.[1581]
    This letter he early bid me give his father,
    And threaten'd me with death, going in the vault,[1582]          275
    If I departed not and left him there.[1583]

    _Prince._ Give me the letter; I will look on it.
    Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
    Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

    _Page._ He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;[1584]    280
    And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
    Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
    And by and by my master drew on him;
    And then I ran away to call the watch.

    _Prince._ This letter doth make good the friar's words,          285
    Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
    And here he writes that he did buy a poison
    Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
    Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
    Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!                       290
    See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
    That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
    And I, for winking at your discords too,
    Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.[1585]

    _Cap._ O brother Montague, give me thy hand:                     295
    This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
    Can I demand.

    _Mon._        But I can give thee more:[1586]
    For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
    That whiles Verona by that name is known,[1587]
    There shall no figure at such rate be set[1588]                  300
    As that of true and faithful Juliet.[1589]

    _Cap._ As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;[1590]
    Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

    _Prince._ A glooming peace this morning with it brings;[1591]
    The sun for sorrow will not show his head:                       305
    Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
    Some shall be pardon'd and some punished:[1592]
    For never was a story of more woe
    Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.      [_Exeunt._[1593]

FOOTNOTES:

[1393] ACT V. SCENE I.] Rowe.

Mantua.] Rowe.

A street.] Capell.

[1394] _flattering truth of_] Qq Ff. _flattering eye of_ (Q1) Malone.
_flattery of_ Pope (Otway's version). _flattering ruth of_ Warburton.
_flattering eye off_ Jackson conj. _flattering death of_ Collier
(Collier MS.). _flattering soother_, Singer conj. _flattering sooth of_
Grant White. _flattering signs of_ Bailey conj.

[1395] _lord_] _L._ Q2 Q3 F1.

_in_] _on_ Q5.

[1396] _this day an_] Qq. _thisan day an_ F1. _this winged_ F2 F3 F4.

[1397] _dream, that gives_] _dreames that gives_ Q4. _dreams that
give_ Q5.

[1398] Enter....] Enter Balthasar his man booted. (Q1). Enter Romeos
man. Q2 Q3 Ff. Enter Romeos man Balthazer. Q4 Q5.

[1399] _fares my Juliet_] (Q1) Steevens. _doth my Lady Juliet_ Qq Ff.
_doth my Juliet_ Pope.

[1400] Bal.] Theobald. Man. Qq Ff.

[1401] _Capels'_] Malone. _Capels_ Qq Ff. _Capulet's_ F4. _Capulets'_
Warburton.

[1402] _lives_] _live_ F1.

[1403] _Since ... sir._] Omitted by Pope.

[1404] _Is ... stars!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_e'en_] _in_ Q2. _even_ The rest.

_defy you_,] Pope. _defie my_ (Q1).

_denie you_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1. _deny you_ F2 Q5 F3 F4.

[1405] _know'st_] Q5. _knowest_ The rest.

[1406] _I ... patience_:] _Pardon me sir, I dare not leave you
thus._ Pope, from (Q1). _Pardon me, sir, I will not leave you thus._
Steevens (1793).

[1407] _my good_] _good my_ Rowe.

_No matter_] _Mo matter_ F1.

[1408] [Exit....] Exit Man. Rowe. Exit man, after _lord_, line 32, Qq
Ff.

[1409] _thoughts_] _thought_ Rowe.

[1410] _a'_] _a_ Q2 Q3 Q4. om. F1. _he_ F2 Q5 F3 F4.

_which_] _whom_ Pope, from (Q1).

[1411] _tortoise_] _tortoyrs_ F1.

[1412] _beggarly_] _braggartly_ Warburton conj.

[1413] _scatter'd_] Theobald (ed. 2). _scattered_ Qq Ff.

[1414] _An if_] Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2. _And if_ (Q1) Q5 F3 F4.

[1415] _present_] _persent_ F1.

[1416] Enter Apothecary.] (Q1) Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1417] _soon-speeding_] F4. _soon speeding_ F3. _soone spreading_ Q5.
_soone speeding_ The rest.

[1418] _fear'st_] Ff Q5. _fearest_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1419] _starveth in_] _stareth in_ Rowe, ed. 2 (Otway's version).
_stare within_ Pope. _stayeth in_ Jackson conj. _starteth in_ Anon.
conj.

_thy_] _thine_ Q5 F3 F4.

[1420] _Contempt ... back_,] _Upon thy back hangs ragged misery_ (Q1)
Malone.

_hangs upon_] _hang on_ F2 F3 F4. _hang upon_ Q5.

[1421] _pay_] (Q1) Q4 Q5. _pray_ Q2 Q3 Ff.

[1422] _There is_] Qq. _There's_ Ff.

_There ... souls_,] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1423] _murder_] _murthers_ Q4. _murders_ Q5.

[1424] _mayst_] _maiest_ Q2 Q3 F1. _mai'st_ Q4. _mayest_ F2. _maist_ Q5
F3 F4.

[1425] _thyself in_] _thee into_ (Q1) Pope.

[1426] _Scene ii._] Rowe.

Friar Laurence's cell.] Capell. The Monastery near Verona. Rowe.

[1427] Enter Friar John.] Theobald. Enter Friar John to Friar Laurence.
Qq Ff.

[1428] Enter Friar Laurence.] Omitted by Rowe.

[1429] _if his mind_] _if mind_ F2 F3 F4.

[1430] _Here ... sick, And ... town_,] _And ... town, Here ... sick,_
Malone conj. (withdrawn).

[1431] _my_] _may_ Q4.

[1432] _bare_] _bore_ Pope.

[1433] _could_] _cold_ Q4.

[1434] _nice_] _ice_ Jackson conj.

[1435] _it thee._] _it._ Hanmer.

[1436] _this_] _these_ Q5.

[1437] SCENE III.] Rowe.

A churchyard; ...] A Churchyard, in it, a noble Monument ... Rowe. om.
Qq Ff.

[1438] Enter ...] Enter Countie Paris and his Page with flowers and
sweete water. (Q1). Enter Paris and his Page. Qq Ff. Enter Paris and
his Page, with a Light. Rowe.

[1439] _aloof_] F4. _aloofe_ Qq. _aloft_ F1 F2 F3.

[1440] _yond yew-trees_] Pope. _this Ewtree_ (Q1). _yond young trees_
Qq Ff (_yong_ Q4).

[1441] _Holding thine_] Capell. _Keeping thine_ (Q1). _Holding thy_
Qq F1 F2. _Laying thy_ F3 F4.

[1442] _hear'st_] Rowe (ed. 2). _hearest_ Qq Ff.

[1443] [Aside] Marked first by Capell.

_stand alone_] _stand along_ F2. _stay alone_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[1444] [Retires.] Capell. Exit. F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1.

[1445] [going up to the Tomb. Capell.

[1446] _strew,-- ... stones;--_] _strew,--(O woe, ... stones!)_
Staunton. _strew: O woe, ... stones!_ Capell. _strew: ... stones_, Qq
Ff.

[1447] _O woe ... weep._] See note (XIV).

[1448] _dew_] _new_ Q5.

[1449] [The Page whistles.] The Boy whistles. Rowe. Whistle Boy. Qq Ff.

[1450] _way_] _wayes_ F1.

[1451] _rite_] Pope (ed. 2). _right_ Qq Ff. _rites_ (Q1) Pope (ed. 1).

[1452] _Muffle me, night_,] Rowe. _muffle me night_ Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff.
_night muffle me_ Q5.

[Retires.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1453] Enter ... mattock, &c.] Malone, following Capell. Enter Romeo,
and Peter. Q2 Q3 Ff. Enter Romeo and Balthaser his man. Q4 Q5.

[1454] SCENE IV. Pope.

_that_] Q2 Ff. _the_ Q3 Q4 Q5.

[1455] _hear'st_] Ff Q5. _hearest_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1456] _farther_] Qq. _further_ Ff.

[1457] _savage-wild_] The hyphen inserted by Steevens.

[1458] Balt. or Bal.] Q4 Q5. Pet. The rest.

[1459] _you_] _ye_ Q2.

[1460] _show me friendship_] _win my favour_ (Q1) Pope.

[1461] [Aside] Marked first by Capell.

[1462] [Retires.] Balthasar retires. Hanmer. Exit. F2 F3 F4. om. Qq F1.

[1463] _detestable maw_] _maw detestable_ Hanmer.

[fixing his Mattock in the Tomb. Capell.

[1464] _despite_] _requite_ Keightley conj.

[Opens the tomb.] Breaking open the Monument. Rowe, after line 47.

[1465] _murder'd_] _murdred_ Qq Ff. _murthered_ Rowe.

[1466] [Comes forward.] Draws, and rushes forward. Capell, after line
54. om. Qq Ff.

[1467]. _unhallow'd_] Pope. _unhallowed_ Qq Ff. _unhollowed_ Rowe (ed.
2).

[1468] _villain_] _vallaine_ F1.

[1469] _Good gentle_] _Go, gentle_ Anon. conj.

[1470] _these_] Qq. _those_ Ff.

[1471] _Put_] _Pull_ Rowe. _Pluck_ Capell conj. _Heap_ (Q1) Malone.

[1472] _Stay ... away._] Omitted by Pope.

[1473] _bid_] _bad_ Q5.

[1474] _thy conjurations_] (Q1) Malone. _thy commiration_ Q2. _thy
commisseration_ Q3 F1. _thy commiseration_ Q4 F2 Q5 F3 F4. _thy
conjuration_ Capell. _commiseration_ Collier MS. _thy commination_
Mommsen conj.

[1475] [They fight.] (Q1). They Fight, Paris falls. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[1476] Page.] Q4 Q5. Boy. (Q1). om. Q2 Q3. Pet. Ff. Page [without.
Hanmer.

_O Lord, ... watch._] Printed in italics in Q2 Q3.

_the_] _thee_ Rowe (ed. 1).

[Exit.] Exit Page. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1477] [Falls.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1478] [Dies.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1479] _In ... face_:] _Let me peruse this face:--In faith I will;--_
Seymour conj.

[1480] _Mercutio's_] _Mercutius_ Q3 F1 F2 F3.

[1481] _A grave ... youth_;] Omitted by Pope.

[1482] _and her ... lightning?_] Omitted by Pope.

[1483] _Death_] _Dead_ Dyce, ed. 2 (Lettsom conj.).

_lie_] _be_ F3 F4.

[Laying ...] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1484] _how_] _now_ Johnson conj.

[1485] _suck'd_] _suck_ F2.

[1486] _art_] _are_ F1 F2.

[1487] _thine_] Qq. _thy_ Ff.

[1488] _shall ... amorous_] Theobald. _I will beleeve, Shall I beleeve
that unsubstantiall death is amorous_ Qq Ff. _I will believe That ...
amorous_ Pope.

[1489] _palace_] _pallat_ Q2.

_night_] _night._ Q2.

[1490] _Depart again_] See note (XV).

[throwing himself by her. Capell.

[1491] _world-wearied_] Q3 Q4 F1 Q5. _world wearied_ Q2. _worlds
wearied_ F2 F3 F4. _world's wearied_ Rowe.

[1492] [pours it into a Cup. Capell.

[1493] _thy_] _my_ Pope.

[1494] [Drinks.] Drinks the poison. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1495] [Dies.] Theobald. Kisses her, and expires. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1496] Enter ...] Malone, after Capell. Enter Frier with Lanthorne,
Crowe, and Spade. Qq Ff.

[1497] _Saint_] Q4 Q5. S. Q2. _St._ Q3 Ff.

_Francis_] _Frances_ Q2.

[1498] After this line Steevens, from (Q1), inserts _Who is it that
consorts, so late, the dead?_

[1499] Bal.] Balt. Q4 Q5. Man. Q2 Q3 Ff.

[1500] _I_] om. F2 F3.

[1501] _Capels'_] _Capulet's_ F4. _Capulets'_ Theobald.

[1502] _It doth ... love._] As in Johnson. One line in Qq. Two, the
first ending _sir_, in Ff.

[1503] _that you_] _you dearly_ Pope.

[1504] _intents_] Q5 F3 F4. _entents_ Q2 Q3 Q4 F1 F2.

[1505] _Stay, then_;] _Stay then_, Q5. _Stay then_ Q2. _Stay, then_ Q3
Q4 Ff.

_fear comes_] Qq. _feares comes_ F1. _feares come_ F2 F3 F4 (_fears_ F3
F4).

[1506] _unlucky_] _unthriftie_ Q2.

[1507] _As ... him._] om. Seymour conj.

[1508] _yew-tree_] Pope. _yong tree_ Q2. _young tree_ Q3 Q4 Ff Q5.

[1509] _Romeo!_] Rowe. _Romeo._ Qq Ff. _Romeo?--_ Capell.

[Advances.] Malone. leaves him, and goes forward. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1510] [Enters ...] enters the Monument. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1511] _unkind_] _vn knd_ F1. _unkn'd_ F2.

[1512] [Juliet wakes.] Juliet awaking. Pope. Juliet rises. (Q1). Juliet
awakes, and looks about her. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1513] _where is_] Qq. _where's_ Ff.

[1514] [Noise within.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1515] _noise. Lady_,] _noise! Lady_, Pope. _noyse Lady_, Qq Ff.
_noise, Lady,_ Rowe.

[1516] _intents_] _entents_ Q3 F1 F2.

[1517] _Come ... stay_] Omitted by Pope.

[Noise again. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

_no longer stay_] _stay no longer_ Capell.

[1518] _not away_] _notuaway_ F1.

[Exit Fri. L.] Dyce. Exit. Qq Ff (after line 159). Exit, hastily,
Capell (after line 159).

[1519] _love's_] _loves_ F1.

[1520] _drunk ... left_] _drunke ... left_ Q2. _drinke ... left_ Q3 Q4
Ff (_lest_ F1). _drinke ... leave_ (Q1) Q5.

[1521] _To ... restorative._] Omitted by Pope.

[Kisses him.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1522] First Watch. [Within] Capell. Watch. Qq Ff.

_way?_] _way._ Q2.

[1523] _Yea, noise?_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[Snatching ...] Steevens. taking Romeo's. Capell. Finding a dagger.
Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[1524] _This is_] Q2 Q4 Q5. _Tis is_ Q3. _'Tis in_ Ff.

[Stabs herself] Kils herselfe. Ff (at the end of the line). om. Qq. She
stabs herselfe and falles. (Q1).

_rust_] Qq Ff. _rest_ Singer, from (Q1).

[Falls ...] Malone. throws herself upon her Lover, and expires. Capell.

[1525] Enter Watch ...] Enter Watch, and the Page. Capell, from (Q1).
Enter Boy and Watch. Qq Ff (after _warm_, line 167).

[1526] Page.] Capell. Watch boy. Q2 Q3. Boy. Q4 Q5 Ff.

_This ... burn_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[1527] First Watch.] 1. W. Capell. Watch. Qq Ff (and elsewhere).

_The ... churchyard_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_about the churchyard_] _the church-yard, about_ Hanmer.

[1528] _whoe'er_] _whom e'er_ Pope.

[Exeunt some of the Watch. Hanmer. Exeunt some of the Watch, the rest
enter the Tomb. Capell.

[1529] _this_] Q2. _these_ Q3 Q4 Ff Q5.

[1530] _search ... these piteous woes_] _go ... this piteous woe_
Johnson conj.

[1531] [Exeunt other Watch. Capell.

After this S. Walker conjectures that a line is omitted.

[1532] _We see ... descry._] Omitted by Pope.

[1533] Re-enter ...] Dyce. Enter ... Rowe. Enter Romeos man. Qq Ff.

[1534] Sec. Watch.] Rowe. Watch. Qq. Wat. Ff.

_Here's ... churchyard_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[1535] First Watch.] Rowe. Chief. watch. Qq. Con. Ff.

[1536] _come_] _comes_ F2 F3 F4.

Re-enter ...] Enter Frier, and another Watchman. Qq Ff.

[1537] _churchyard's_] _churchyards_ Q2. _church-yard_ The rest.

[1538] _too_] _too too_ Q2. _too, too_ Q3 Q4.

Enter ...] Rowe. Enter the Prince. Q2 Q3 Q4 Ff. Enter Prince. Q5.

[1539] SCENE V. Pope.

[1540] _morning_] Q2 Q3. _mornings_ Q4 Ff Q5.

[1541] Enter....] Capell (substantially). Enter Capels. Q2 Q3. Enter
Capulet and his Wife. Q4 Ff Q5.

[1542] _they so shriek_] _is so shrike_ Q2. _is so shriek'd_ Edd. conj.

_shriek_] F4. _shrike_ The rest.

[1543] La. Cap.] Rowe. Wife. Qq Ff.

[1544] _The people_] Pope. _O the people_ Qq Ff.

[1545] _toward_] _to ward_ Q3 Q4.

_our_] _out_ F1.

[1546] _our_] Capell (Johnson and Heath conj.). _your_ Qq Ff.

[1547] First Watch.] 1. W. Capell. Watch. Qq. Wat. Ff.

[1548] _Search_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[1549] _slaughter'd_] _Slaughter_ Q2.

[1550] Enter Capulet and his wife. Q2 Q3.

[1551] _O heavens!_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

_heavens_] Q2. _heaven_ The rest.

[1552] _his house ... And it_] _the sheath Lies ... The point_ Pope.

[1553] _it_] Q2. _is_ The rest.

_mis-sheathed_] F4. _misheathed_ F1 F2 Q5 F3. _missheathd_ Q2.
_missheath'd_ Q3 Q4. mi-_sheath'd_ Jackson conj.

_it mis-sheathed_] _it is missheath'd_ Mommsen conj.

[1554] Enter ... and others.] Capell. Enter Mountague. Qq Ff.

[1555] _more early down_] (Q1) Steevens. _now early downe_ Q3 Q4 Ff Q5.
_now earling downe_ Q2. _now early fallen_ Pope.

[1556] After this line Ritson would insert, from (Q1), _And young
Benvolio is deceased too._

[1557] _mine_] Q2. _my_ The rest.

[1558] _Look_] _Look in this monument_ Steevens conj. _Look here_
Keightley. _Look there_ Dyce conj. _Look, look_ Anon. conj.

[showing Romeo. Capell.

[1559] _is in_] _in is_ F1 F2.

[1560] _mouth_] _moneth_ Q4.

_outrage_] _outcry_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[1561] _Doth_] _Doe_ Q5.

[1562] _here_] _heare_ Q3 Q4.

[1563] _that_] Q4 Q5. _thats_ Q2 Q3. _that's_ Ff.

[1564] _Tybalt's_] _Taybalts_ F2.

[1565] _mean_] _meane_ Q2. _meanes_ The rest.

[1566] _writ_] _write_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1567] _as_] _at_ Keightley.

[1568] _borrow'd_] Capell. _borrowed_ Qq Ff.

[1569] _Return'd_] _Returned_ Q3 Q4.

[1570] _hour_] F3 F4. _hower_ Q2 Q3. _houre_ The rest.

_waking_] _awaking_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1571] _minute_] _minutes_ Hanmer.

[1572] _awaking_] _awakening_ Q2. _a waking_ F2.

[1573] _entreated her_] _intreat her to_ F4.

[1574] _scare_] Qq F3 F4. _scarre_ F1 F2.

[1575] _All this ... time_] Arranged as by Pope. Three lines, ending
_privie: ... fault, ... time,_ in Qq Ff.

[1576] _Her nurse_] _the nurse_ Q5.

_and_] om. Rowe. _but_ Pope.

[1577] _his_] Q2. _the_ The rest. _its_ Pope.

[1578] _a_] _an_ F4.

[1579] _in this_] (Q1) Capell. _to this_ Qq Ff.

[1580] Bal.] Q5. Balth. Q2 Q3 Q4. Boy. Ff. Peter. Rowe.

[1581] _place, to ... monument._] _place. To ... monument_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1582] _in_] _to_ Pope.

[1583] _left_] _leaft_ Q3.

[1584] Page.] Ff. Boy. Qq.

[1585] _brace_] _brase_ Q2 Q3 Q4.

[1586] _raise_] _raie_ Q2 Q3.

[1587] _whiles_] Qq Ff. _while_ Rowe.

[1588] _such_] Q2. _that_ The rest.

[1589] _true_] _fair_ Collier MS.

[1590] _Romeo's ... lady's_] _Romeos ... Ladies_ Q2 Q3 Q4. _Romeo ...
Lady_ (Q1) Ff. _Romeo's ... Ladies_ Q5. _Romeo's ... lady_ Theobald.

[1591] _glooming_] _gloomie_ (Q1). _gloomy_ F4. _gloaming_ Taylor conj.
MS.

[1592] _pardon'd_] Ff. _pardoned_ Qq.

[1593] [Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Ff. om. Qq.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

I. 1. There is no division into Acts and Scenes in the Quartos, nor any
trace of division in the Folios, except the 'Actus Primus, ScÃ¦na Prima'
at the beginning of the play.

We wish to remind our readers that the symbol Qq signifies the
agreement of the second, third, fourth, and fifth Quartos.


NOTE II.

I. 2. 116. The first Quarto here has 'thrall,' the others 'debt,' which
though it makes a rhyme does not improve the sense. The next two lines
are not in the first Quarto. As, unlike the immediate context, they
also rhyme, while they are not particularly forcible, we incline to
think that some other hand than Shakespeare's inserted them.


NOTE III.

II. 1. 13. Pope was the first commentator who called attention to the
ballad which is alluded to in this passage, and it is remarkable that
with all his partiality for the first Quarto he did not adopt the
reading 'trim,' found both there and in the ballad. Percy, in a note
to the ballad printed in his _Reliques_, conjectured that Shakespeare
had written 'trim,' not 'true,' apparently without knowing that the
word was found in the first Quarto. Capell, in his note, says that he
had retained 'true' in his text, owing to his not having observed the
authority for the other reading.


NOTE IV.

II. 2. As there is no indication given in the Quartos and Folios of
Romeo's entrance here, it is not impossible that in the old arrangement
of the scene the wall was represented as dividing the stage, so that
the audience could see Romeo on one side and Mercutio on the other. If
this were the case it would tend to justify Capell's arrangement of
_Hen. VIII._ v. 2, though in the present instance he makes no allusion
to it. It is clear from the first line of Romeo's speech that he
overhears what Mercutio says, and though we have not altered the usual
arrangement, we cannot but feel that there is an awkwardness in thus
separating the two lines of a rhyming couplet.


NOTE V.

II. 2. 152. Malone erroneously attributes the reading 'suit' to the
Quarto of 1597. The words, 'To cease thy suit,' are found in Brooke's
_Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Iuliet_, p. 21 of the reprint in Mr
Collier's _Shakespeare's Library_.


NOTE VI.

II. 2. 184-II. 3. 5. This passage was printed substantially right in
the Quarto of 1597. The Quarto of 1599 inserted after the first line of
Romeo's speech the first four of the Friar's, repeating them in their
proper place. In Juliet's speech, the same edition by printing one
line as two, and mistaking the stage directions gave rise to a further
corruption in the Quarto of 1609.

In Q2 (1599) the passage stands:

    'Good night, good night.
    Parting is such sweete sorrow,
    That I shall say good night, till it be morrow.

    _Iu._ Sleep dwel vpon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.

    _Ro._ Would I were sleepe and peace so sweet to rest
    The grey eyde morne smiles on the frowning night,
    Checkring the Easterne Clouds with streaks of light,
    And darknesse fleckted like a drunkard reeles,
    From forth daies pathway, made by _Tytans_ wheeles.
    Hence will I to my ghostly Friers close cell,
    His helpe to craue, and my deare hap to tell.

                                                                 _Exit._

                   _Enter Frier alone with a basket._

    _Fri._ The grey-eyed morne smiles on the frowning night,
    Checking the Easterne clowdes with streaks of light:
    And fleckeld darknesse like a drunkard reeles,
    From forth daies path, and _Titans_ burning wheeles:
    Now ere &c.'

In Q3(1609) we read:

    'Good night, good night.

    _Ro._ Parting is such sweete sorrow,
    That I shall say goodnight, till it be morrow.

    _Iu._ Sleepe dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.

    _Rom._ Would I were sleepe and peace so sweete to rest
    The gray-eyde morne, &c.'

For the rest Q3 follows Q2 without any material variation, except that
it reads 'fleckeld' for 'fleckted,' in the eighth line.

The fourth Quarto, undated, has ejected the intruding lines and
distributed the dialogue right. One error alone remains, viz. that
'Good night, good night ... sorrow' is divided still into two lines.
The fifth Quarto follows the fourth.

The first Folio follows the third Quarto as usual without any variation
of importance.

The second Folio, followed by the third and fourth, inserts, '_Exit_'
after the word 'breast,' adopts the reading of the first down to the
end of Romeo's speech, and makes the Friar's begin at line 5, thus:

    '_Fri._ Now ere the Sun advance his burning eye, &c.'

Pope restored the true arrangement. In the fourth line of the Friar's
speech he introduced 'pathway made by Titan's wheels' from the passage
as first given in Q2 Q3 F1.


NOTE VII.

II. 5. 15, 16. The second Quarto reads here:

    '_M._ And his to me, but old folks, many fain as they wer dead,
    Vnwieldie, slowe, heauie, and pale as lead.'

And this is followed with slight variations of spelling by the third.

The fourth and fifth omit the _M._, as do the Folios, which give the
passage thus:

    'And his to me, but old folkes,
    Many faine as they were dead,
    Vnwieldie, slow, heauy, and pale as lead.'

Pope omits the lines 'But old folks ... lead,' thinking probably that
they are due to interpolation, a supposition which the unmeaning '_M._'
in the earlier Quartos seems to confirm.

Mr Collier's MS. corrector has (Shakespeare, Ed. 2, Note ad loc.):

    'As his to me: but old folks seem as dead,
    Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and dull as lead.'

This is not mentioned in his _Notes and Emendations_.

For 'many' Johnson substitutes 'marry;'

    'But old folks, marry, feign as they were dead, &c.'


NOTE VIII.

III. 3. 38-46. Instead of the lines which he put in the margin, Pope
inserted the following, copied with some alterations from the first
Quarto:

    'But Romeo may not, he is banished!
    O father, hadst thou no strong poison mixt,
    No sharp ground knife, no present means of death,
    But banishment to torture me withal?'


NOTE IX.

III. 3. 40-43. The Quarto of 1599 reads as follows:

    'This may flyes do, when I from this must flie,
    And sayest thou yet, that exile is not death?
    But _Romeo_ may not, he is banished.
    Flies may do this, but I from this must flie:
    They are freemen, but I am banished.'

The same order is followed in the subsequent Quartos. The reading of
the first Quarto will be seen in the reprint which follows the play.
The first Folio gives:

    'This may Flies doe, when I from this must flie,
    And saist thou yet, that exile is not death?
    But _Romeo_ may not, hee is banished.'

This reading is followed by the other Folios, Rowe, Theobald,
Warburton, and Johnson. Hanmer follows Pope in his text (see Note
VIII), omitting altogether the lines which Pope put in the margin.

Capell has:

    'Flies may do this, but I from this must fly;
    They are free men, but I am banished.'

Steevens (1773) reads:

    'Flies may do this, when I from this must fly;
    They are free men, but I am banished.
    And say'st thou yet, that exile is not death?
    But Romeo may not;--he is banished.'

In his note on the passage, in the edition of 1778, he conjectured
that the line 'But Romeo ... banished' should be inserted after 'their
own kisses sin;' an arrangement which was adopted by Malone and by
Steevens himself in his edition of 1793. Capell suggests that the lines
he retains 'were second thoughts of the poet, and their original was
meant for expunction.' This may possibly be true, but we have adopted
the reading given in our text because it retains, without manifest
absurdity, lines which are all undoubtedly Shakespeare's. For a similar
instance see Note XVIII. on _Love's Labour's Lost_.

In IV. I. III, of the present play we have omitted a line which occurs
in all the Quartos, except the first, and all the Folios, because it
could not be retained without absolute detriment to the sense.


NOTE X.

III. 5. 82-104. Instead of this passage Pope, printing, as he says,
'more agreeably to the first edition,' gave as follows:

    I soon would send to _Mantua_ where he is,
    And give him such an unaccustom'd dram
    That he should soon keep _Tybalt_ company.

    _Jul._ Find you the means, and I'll find such a man,
    For while he lives, my heart shall ne'er be light
    'Till I behold him--dead--is my poor heart,
    Thus for a kinsman vext?

    _La. Cap._ Well, let that pass.
    I come to bring thee joyful tidings, girl.'

In this arbitrary change, he is followed, as usual, by Hanmer, except
that the latter puts a full stop at 'vext.'


NOTE XI.

IV. 3. 58. Mr Dyce conjectured that 'here's drink' was the corruption
of a stage direction, '_here drink_.'


NOTE XII.

IV. 5. 36. Although 'see' was doubtless a conjectural insertion of the
editor of the second Folio in order to complete the metre, like his
addition of 'now' in the next line, yet, as the word occurs in the
corresponding passage of the first Quarto, we have decided on the whole
to retain it.


NOTE XIII.

IV. 5. 65-83. Instead of this speech Pope has the following:

    '_Fri._ Oh peace for shame--
    Your daughter lives in peace and happiness,
    And it is vain to wish it otherwise.
    Heav'n and yourself had part in this fair maid,
    Now heav'n hath all--
    Come stick your rosemary on this fair corpse,
    And as the custom of our country is,
    In all her best and sumptuous ornaments
    Convey her where her ancestors lie tomb'd.'

The last three lines are verbatim from the Quarto of 1597. Hanmer
follows Pope, with a different arrangement in the first lines, which he
prints thus:

    'Oh peace for shame--your daughter lives in peace
    And happiness, and it is vain to wish
    It otherwise. Heav'n and yourself had part
    In this fair maid, now heaven hath her all--
    Come &c.'


NOTE XIV.

V. 3. 13-17. Instead of these five lines Pope inserts the four
following, from the first Quarto:

    'Fair _Juliet_, that with angels dost remain,
    Accept this latest favour at my hand,
    That living honour'd thee, and being dead
    With fun'ral obsequies adorn thy tomb.'

For lines 12-17 Steevens (1773) substituted the corresponding lines of
the first Quarto, except that he follows Pope in reading 'hand' for
'hands.'


NOTE XV.

V. 3. 108. The quarto of 1599 here reads:

    'Depart againe, come lye thou in my arme,
    Heer's to thy health, where ere thou tumblest in.
    O true Appothecarie!
    Thy drugs are quicke. Thus with a kisse I die.
    Depart againe, here, here, will I remaine,
    With wormes &c.'

The third Quarto has the same reading, putting a semi-colon after
'againe' in the fifth line, and is followed by the first Folio,
except that 'armes' is substituted for 'arme' in the first line. The
later Folios make no material change. The reading in our text is
substantially that of the fourth and fifth Quartos. Rowe follows the
Folios, and Pope prints:

    'Depart again: come lye thou in my arms,
    Here's to thy health.--O true apothecary!
    Thy drugs are quick. Here, here will I remain,
    With worms &c.'


NOTE XVI.

Mr Lionel Booth has been kind enough to furnish us with the following
variations which he has found in different copies of the first Folio:

    Page 57, col. 1, line 35: oft the angry.
                              oft a the angry.

    Page 59, col. 2, line 12 from bottom: this place.
                                          thy place.

    Page 62, col. 2, line 5: that Gentlemen.
                             tha Gentlemen.
                        qua- tha: Gentlemen (in Capell's copy).

    Page 71, col. 1, line 8: Holy Father now.
                             Holy Father own.

    Page 71, col. 2, line 36: Cookes.
                              Cockes.




                                  AN

                               EXCELLENT

                          CONCEITED TRAGEDIE

                                  OF

                           ROMEO AND IULIET.




The Prologue.


    _Two houshold Frends alike in dignitie,_
    _(In faire_ Verona, _where we lay our Scene)_
    _From ciuill broyles broke into enmitie,_
    _Whose ciuill warre makes ciuill hands vncleane._
    _From forth the fatall loynes of these two foes,_                  5
    _A paire of starre-crost Louers tooke their life:_
    _Whose misaduentures, piteous ouerthrowes,_
    _(Through the continuing of their Fathers strife,_
    _And death-markt passage of their Parents rage)_
    _Is now the two howres traffique of our Stage._                   10
    _The which if you with patient eares attend,_
    _What here we want wee'l studie to amend._




The most excellent Tragedie of

_Romeo and Iuliet._


[Sidenote: [SC. I.]]

                 _Enter 2. Seruingmen of the_ Capolets.

    _Gregorie_, of my word Ile carrie no coales.

    _2_ No, for if you doo, you should be a Collier.

    _1_ If I be in choler, Ile draw.

    _2_ Euer while you liue, drawe your necke out of the the collar.   5

    _1_ I strike quickly being moou'd.

    _2_ I, but you are not quickly moou'd to strike.

    _1_ A Dog of the house of the _Mountagues_ moues me.

    _2_ To mooue is to stirre, and to bee valiant is to stand
    to it: therefore (of my word) if thou be mooud thou't             10
    runne away.

    _1_ There's not a man of them I meete, but Ile take
    the wall of.

    _2_ That shewes thee a weakling, for the weakest goes
    to the wall.                                                      15

    _1_ Thats true, therefore Ile thrust the men from the
    wall, and thrust the maids to to the walls: nay, thou shalt
    see I am a tall peece of flesh.

    _2_ Tis well thou art not fish, for if thou wert thou
    wouldst be but poore Iohn.                                        20

    _1_ Ile play the tyrant, Ile first begin with the maids, &
    off with their heads.

    _2_ The heads of the maids?

    _1_ I the heades of their Maides, or the Maidenheades,
    take it in what sence thou wilt.                                  25

    _2_ Nay let them take it in sence that feele it, but heere
    comes two of the _Mountagues_.

               _Enter two Seruingmen of the_ Mountagues.

    _1_ Nay feare not me I warrant thee.

    _2_ I feare them no more than thee, but draw.

    _1_ Nay let vs haue the law on our side, let them begin           30
    first. Ile tell thee what Ile doo, as I goe by ile bite my
    thumbe, which is disgrace enough if they suffer it.

    _2_ Content, goe thou by and bite thy thumbe, and ile
    come after and frowne.

    _1 Moun_: Doo you bite your thumbe at vs?                         35

    _1_ I bite my thumbe.

    _2 Moun_: I but i'st at vs?

    _1_ I bite my thumbe, is the law on our side?

    _2_ No.

    _1_ I bite my thumbe.                                             40

    _1 Moun_: I but i'st at vs?               _Enter Beneuolio._

    _2_ Say I, here comes my Masters kinsman.

     _They draw, to them enters_ Tybalt, _they fight, to them the_
      _Prince, old_ Mountague, _and his wife, old_ Capulet _and_
             _his wife, and other Citizens and part them_.

    _Prince_: Rebellious subiects enemies to peace,
    On paine of torture, from those bloody handes
    Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground.                     45
    Three Ciuell brawles bred of an airie word,
    By the old _Capulet_ and _Mountague_,
    Haue thrice disturbd the quiet of our streets.
    If euer you disturbe our streets againe,
    Your liues shall pay the ransome of your fault:                   50
    For this time euery man depart in peace.
    Come _Capulet_ come you along with me,
    And _Mountague_, come you this after noone,
    To know our farther pleasure in this case,
    To old free Towne our common iudgement place,                     55
    Once more on paine of death each man depart.

                               _Exeunt._

    _M_: wife. Who set this auncient quarrel first abroach?
    Speake Nephew, were you by when it began?

    _Benuo_: Here were the seruants of your aduersaries,
    And yours close fighting ere I did approch.                       60

    _Wife_: Ah where is _Romeo_, saw you him to day?
    Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

    _Ben_: Madame, an houre before the worshipt sunne
    Peept through the golden window of the East,
    A troubled thought drew me from companie:
    Where vnderneath the groue _Sicamoure_,
    That Westward rooteth from the Citties side,
    So early walking might I see your sonne.
    I drew towards him, but he was ware of me,
    And drew into the thicket of the wood:                            70
    I noting his affections by mine owne,
    That most are busied when th' are most alone,
    Pursued my honor, not pursuing his.

    _Moun_: Black and portentious must this honor proue,
    Vnlesse good counsaile doo the cause remooue.                     75

    _Ben_: Why tell me Vncle do you know the cause?

                             _Enter Romeo._

    _Moun_: I neyther know it nor can learne of him.

    _Ben_: See where he is, but stand you both aside,
    Ile know his grieuance, or be much denied.

    _Mount_: I would thou wert so happie by thy stay                  80
    To heare true shrift. Come Madame lets away.

    _Benuo_: Good morrow Cosen.

    _Romeo_: Is the day so young?

    _Ben_: But new stroke nine.

    _Romeo_: Ay me, sad hopes seeme long.                             85
    Was that my Father that went hence so fast?

    _Ben_: It was, what sorrow lengthens _Romeos_ houres?

    _Rom_: Not hauing that, which hauing makes them short.

    _Ben_: In loue.

    _Ro_: Out.                                                        90

    _Ben_: Of loue.

    _Ro_: Out of her fauor where I am in loue.

    _Ben_: Alas that loue so gentle in her view,
    Should be so tyrranous and rough in proofe.

    _Ro_: Alas that loue whose view is muffled still,                 95
    Should without lawes giue path-waies to our will:
    Where shall we dine? Gods me, what fray was here?
    Yet tell me not for I haue heard it all,
    Heres much to doe with hate, but more with loue.
    Why then, O brawling loue, O louing hate,                        100
    O anie thing, of nothing first create!
    O heauie lightnes serious vanitie!
    Mishapen _Caos_ of best seeming thinges,
    Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sicke health,
    Still waking sleepe, that is not what it is:                     105
    This loue feele I, which feele no loue in this.
    Doest thou not laugh?

    _Ben_: No Cose I rather weepe.

    _Rom_: Good hart at what?

    _Ben_: At thy good hearts oppression.                            110

    _Ro_: Why such is loues transgression,
    Griefes of mine owne lie heauie at my hart,
    Which thou wouldst propagate to haue them prest
    With more of thine, this griefe that thou hast showne,
    Doth ad more griefe to too much of mine owne:                    115
    Loue is a smoke raisde with the fume of sighes
    Being purgde, a fire sparkling in louers eyes:
    Being vext, a sea raging with a louers teares.
    What is it else? A madnes most discreet,
    A choking gall, and a preseruing sweet. Farewell Cose.           120

    _Ben_: Nay Ile goe along.
    And if you hinder me you doo me wrong.

    _Ro_: Tut I haue lost my selfe I am not here,
    This is not _Romeo_, hee's some other where.

    _Ben_: Tell me in sadnes whome she is you loue?                  125

    _Ro_: What shall I grone and tell thee?

    _Ben_: Why no, but sadly tell me who.

    _Ro_: Bid a sickman in sadnes make his will.
    Ah word ill vrgde to one that is so ill.
    In sadnes Cosen I doo loue a woman.                              130

    _Ben_: I aimde so right, when as you said you lou'd.

    _Ro_: A right good mark-man, and shee's faire I loue.

    _Ben_: A right faire marke faire Cose is soonest hit.

    _Ro_: But in that hit you misse, shee'le not be hit
    With _Cupids_ arrow, she hath _Dianaes_ wit,                     135
    And in strong proofe of chastitie well arm'd:
    Gainst _Cupids_ childish bow she liues vnharm'd,
    Shee'le not abide the siedge of louing tearmes,
    Nor ope her lap to Saint seducing gold,
    Ah she is rich in beautie, only poore,                           140
    That when she dies with beautie dies her store.      _Exeu._


[Sidenote: [SC. II.]]

                 _Enter Countie_ Paris, _old_ Capulet.

    Of honorable reckoning are they both,
    And pittie tis they liue at ods so long:
    But leauing that, what say you to my sute?

    _Capu_: What should I say more than I said before,
    My daughter is a stranger in the world,                            5
    Shee hath not yet attainde to fourteene yeares:
    Let two more sommers wither in their pride,
    Before she can be thought fit for a Bride.

    _Paris_: Younger than she are happie mothers made.

    _Cap_: But too soone marde are these so early maried:             10
    But wooe her gentle _Paris_, get her heart,
    My word to her consent is but a part.
    This night I hold an old accustom'd Feast,
    Whereto I haue inuited many a guest,
    Such as I loue: yet you among the store,                          15
    One more most welcome makes the number more.
    At my poore house you shall behold this night,
    Earth treadding stars, that make darke heauen light:
    Such comfort as doo lusty youngmen feele,
    When well apparaild Aprill on the heele                           20
    Of lumping winter treads, euen such delights
    Amongst fresh female buds shall you this night
    Inherit at my house, heare all, all see,
    And like her most, whose merite most shalbe.
    Such amongst view of many myne beeing one,                        25
    May stand in number though in reckoning none.

                          _Enter Servingman._

    Where are you sirra, goe trudge about
    Through faire _Verona_ streets, and seeke them out:
    Whose names are written here and to them say,
    My house and welcome at their pleasure stay.          _Exeunt._   30

    _Ser_: Seeke them out whose names are written here,
    and yet I knowe not who are written here: I must to
    the learned to learne of them, that's as much to say, as
    the Taylor must meddle with his Laste, the Shoomaker
    with his needle, the Painter with his nets, and the Fisher        35
    with his Pensill, I must to the learned.

                      _Enter Benuolio and Romeo._

    _Ben_: Tut man one fire burnes out anothers burning,
    One paine is lessned with anothers anguish:
    Turne backward, and be holp with backward turning.
    One desperate griefe cures with anothers languish.                40
    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
    And the ranke poyson of the old will die.

    _Romeo_: Your Planton leafe is excellent for that.

    _Ben_: For what?

    _Romeo_: For your broken shin.                                    45

    _Ben_: Why _Romeo_ art thou mad?

    _Rom_: Not mad, but bound more than a mad man is.
    Shut vp in prison, kept without my foode,
    Whipt and tormented, and Godden good fellow.

    _Ser_: Godgigoden, I pray sir can you read?                       50

    _Rom_: I mine owne fortune in my miserie.

    _Ser_: Perhaps you haue learned it without booke:
    but I pray can you read any thing you see?

    _Rom_: I if I know the letters and the language.

    _Seru_: Yee say honestly, rest you merrie.                        55

    _Rom_: Stay fellow I can read.

                         _He reads the Letter._

    _Seigneur_ Martino _and his wife and daughters, Countie_
    Anselme _and his beauteous sisters, the Ladie widdow of_
    Vtruuio, _Seigneur_ Placentio, _and his louelie Neeces_,
    Mercutio _and his brother_ Valentine, _mine vncle_ Capulet        60
    _his wife and daughters, my faire Neece_ Rosaline _and_
    _Liuia, Seigneur_ Valentio _and his Cosen_ Tibalt, Lucio
    _and the liuelie_ Hellena.

    A faire assembly, whether should they come?

    _Ser_: Vp.                                                        65

    _Ro_: Whether to supper?

    _Ser_: To our house.

    _Ro_: Whose house?

    _Ser_: My Masters.

    _Ro_: Indeed I should haue askt thee that before.                 70

    _Ser_: Now il'e tel you without asking. My Master is
    the great rich _Capulet_, and if you be not of the house of
    _Mountagues_, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest
    you merrie.

    _Ben_: At this same auncient feast of _Capulets_,                 75
    Sups the faire _Rosaline_ whom thou so loues:
    With all the admired beauties of _Verona_,
    Goe thither and with vnattainted eye,
    Compare her face with some that I shall shew,
    And I will make thee thinke thy swan a crow.                      80

    _Ro_: When the deuout religion of mine eye
    Maintaines such falshood, then turne teares to fire,
    And these who often drownde could neuer die,
    Transparent Heretiques be burnt for liers.
    One fairer than my loue, the all seeing sonne                     85
    Nere saw her match, since first the world begun.

    _Ben_: Tut you saw her faire none els being by,
    Her selfe poysd with her selfe in either eye:
    But in that Cristall scales let there be waide,
    Your Ladyes loue, against some other maide                        90
    That I will shew you shining at this feast,
    And she shall scant shew well that now seemes best.

    _Rom_: Ile goe along no such sight to be showne,
    But to reioyce in splendor of mine owne.


[Sidenote: [SC. III.]]

                    _Enter Capulets wife and Nurce._

    _Wife_: Nurce wher's my daughter call her forth to mee.

    _Nurce_: _Now by my maiden head at twelue yeare old I_
    _bad her come, what Lamb, what Ladie bird, God forbid._
    _Wher's this girle? what_ Iuliet.      _Enter Iuliet._             5

    _Iuliet_: How now who cals?

    _Nurce_: _Your Mother._

    _Iul_: Madame I am here, what is your will?

    _W_: This is the matter. Nurse giue leaue a while, we
    must talke in secret. Nurce come back again I haue remembred      10
    me, thou'se heare our counsaile. Thou knowest
    my daughters of a prettie age.

    _Nurce_: _Faith I can tell her age vnto a houre._

    _Wife_: Shee's not fourteene.

    _Nurce_: _I'll lay fourteene of my teeth, and yet to my_          15
    _teene be it spoken, I haue but foure, shee's not fourteene._
    _How long is it now to_ Lammas-tide?

    _Wife_: A fortnight and odde dayes.

    _Nurce_: _Euen or odde, of all dayes in the yeare come_
    Lammas _Eue at night shall she be fourteene._ Susan _and she_     20
    _God rest all Christian soules were of an age. Well_ Susan _is_
    _with God, she was too good for me: But as I said on_ Lammas
    _Eue at night shall she be fourteene, that shall shee marie_
    _I remember it well. Tis since the Earth-quake nowe eleauen_
    _yeares, and she was weand I neuer shall forget it, of_           25
    _all the daies of the yeare vpon that day: for I had then laid_
    _wormewood to my dug, sitting in the sun vnder the Doue-house_
    _wall. My Lord and you were then at_ Mantua, _nay I_
    _do beare a braine: But as I said, when it did tast the wormwood_
    _on the nipple of my dug, & felt it bitter, pretty foole_         30
    _to see it teachie and fall out with Dugge. Shake quoth the_
    _Doue-house twas no need I trow to bid me trudge, and since_
    _that time it is a leauen yeare: for then could_ Iuliet _stande_
    _high lone, nay by the Roode, shee could haue wadled vp and_
    _downe, for euen the day before shee brake her brow, and then_    35
    _my husband God be with his soule, hee was a merrie man:_
    _Dost thou fall forward_ Iuliet? _thou wilt fall backward when_
    _thou hast more wit: wilt thou not_ Iuliet? _and by my hollidam,_
    _the pretty foole left crying and said I. To see how a_
    _ieast shall come about, I warrant you if I should liue a hundred_  40
    _yeare, I neuer should forget it, wilt thou not_ Iuliet_?_
    _and by my troth she stinted and cried I._

    _Iuliet_: And stint thou too, I prethee Nurce say I.

    _Nurce_: _Well goe thy waies, God marke thee for his_
    _grace, thou wert the prettiest Babe that euer I nurst, might_    45
    _I but liue to see thee married once, I haue my wish._

    _Wife_: And that same marriage Nurce, is the Theame
    I meant to talke of: Tell me _Iuliet_, howe stand you affected
    to be married?

    _Iul_: It is an honor that I dreame not off.                      50

    _Nurce_: _An honor! were not I thy onely Nurce, I_
    _would say thou hadst suckt wisedome from thy Teat._

    _Wife_: Well girle, the Noble Countie _Paris_ seekes
    thee for his Wife.

    _Nurce_: _A man young Ladie, Ladie such a man as all_             55
    _the world, why he is a man of waxe._

    _Wife: Veronaes_ Summer hath not such a flower.

    _Nurce_: _Nay he is a flower, in faith a very flower._

    _Wife_: Well _Iuliet_, how like you of _Paris_ loue.

    _Iuliet_: Ile looke to like, if looking liking moue,              60
    But no more deepe will I engage mine eye,
    Then your consent giues strength to make it flie.

                            _Enter Clowne._

    Clowne: _Maddam you are cald for, supper is readie,_
    _the Nurce curst in the Pantrie, all thinges in extreamitie,_
    _make hast for I must be gone to waite._                          65


[Sidenote: [SC. IV.]]

                _Enter Maskers with_ Romeo _and a Page_.

    _Ro_: What shall this speech bee spoke for our excuse?
    Or shall we on without Apologie.

    _Benuoleo_: The date is out of such prolixitie,
    Weele haue no _Cupid_ hudwinckt with a Scarfe,
    Bearing a _Tartars_ painted bow of lath,                           5
    Scaring the Ladies like a crow-keeper:
    Nor no withoutbooke Prologue faintly spoke
    After the Prompter, for our entrance.
    But let them measure vs by what they will,
    Weele measure them a measure and be gone.                         10

    _Rom_: A torch for me I am not for this aumbling,
    Being but heauie I will beare the light.

    _Mer_: Beleeue me _Romeo_ I must haue you daunce.

    _Rom_: Not I beleeue me you haue dancing shooes
    With nimble soles, I haue a soule of lead                         15
    So stakes me to the ground I cannot stirre.

    _Mer_: Giue me a case to put my visage in,
    A visor for a visor, what care I
    What curious eye doth coate deformitie.

    _Rom_: Giue me a Torch, let wantons light of hart                 20
    Tickle the senceles rushes with their heeles:
    For I am prouerbd with a Grandsire phrase,
    Ile be a candleholder and looke on,
    The game was nere so faire and I am done.

    _Mer_: Tut dun's the mouse, the Cunstables old word,              25
    If thou beest Dun, weele draw thee from the mire
    Of this surreuerence loue wherein thou stickst.
    Leaue this talke, we burne day light here.

    _Rom_: Nay thats not so.    _Mer_: I meane sir in delay,
    We burne our lights by night, like Lampes by day,                 30
    Take our good meaning for our iudgement sits
    Three times a day, ere once in her right wits.

    _Rom_: So we meane well by going to this maske:
    But tis no wit to goe.

    _Mer_: Why _Romeo_ may one aske?                                  35

    _Rom_: I dreamt a dreame to night.

    _Mer_: And so did I. _Rom_: Why what was yours?

    _Mer_: That dreamers often lie.

    _Rom_: In bed a sleepe while they doe dreame things true.

    _Mer_: Ah then I see Queene _Mab_ hath bin with you.              40

    _Ben_: Queene _Mab_ whats she?
    She is the Fairies Midwife and doth come
    In shape no bigger than an Aggat stone
    On the forefinger of a Burgomaster,
    Drawne with a teeme of little Atomi,                              45
    A thwart mens noses when they lie a sleepe.
    Her waggon spokes are made of spinners webs,
    The couer, of the winges of Grashoppers,
    The traces are the Moone-shine watrie beames,
    The collers crickets bones, the lash of filmes,                   50
    Her waggoner is a small gray coated flie,
    Not halfe so big as is a little worme,
    Pickt from the lasie finger of a maide,
    And in this sort she gallops vp and downe
    Through Louers braines, and then they dream of loue:              55
    O're Courtiers knees: who strait on cursies dreame
    O're Ladies lips, who dreame on kisses strait:
    Which oft the angrie Mab with blisters plagues,
    Because their breathes with sweet meats tainted are:
    Sometimes she gallops ore a Lawers lap,                           60
    And then dreames he of smelling out a sute,
    And sometime comes she with a tithe pigs taile,
    Tickling a Parsons nose that lies a sleepe,
    And then dreames he of another benefice:
    Sometime she gallops ore a souldiers nose,                        65
    And then dreames he of cutting forraine throats,
    Of breaches ambuscados, countermines,
    Of healthes fiue fadome deepe, and then anon
    Drums in his eare: at which he startes and wakes,
    And sweares a Praier or two and sleepes againe.                   70
    This is that Mab that makes maids lie on their backes,
    And proues them women of good cariage.
    This is the verie Mab that plats the manes of Horses in the night,
    And plats the Elfelocks in foule sluttish haire,
    Which once vntangled much misfortune breedes.                     75

    _Rom_: Peace, peace, thou talkst of nothing.

    _Mer_: True I talke of dreames,
    Which are the Children of an idle braine,
    Begot of nothing but vaine fantasie,
    Which is as thinne a substance as the aire,                       80
    And more inconstant than the winde,
    Which wooes euen now the frose bowels of the north,
    And being angred puffes away in haste,
    Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

    _Ben_: Come, come, this winde doth blow vs from ourselues.        85
    Supper is done and we shall come too late.

    _Ro_: I feare too earlie, for my minde misgiues
    Some consequence is hanging in the stars,
    Which bitterly begins his fearefull date
    With this nights reuels, and expiers the terme                    90
    Of a dispised life, closde in this breast,
    By some vntimelie forfet of vile death:
    But he that hath the steerage of my course
    Directs my saile, on lustie Gentlemen.


[Sidenote: [SC. V.]]

                 _Enter old_ Capulet _with the ladies_.

    _Capu_: Welcome Gentlemen, welcome Gentlemen,
    Ladies that haue their toes vnplagud with Corns
    Will haue about with you, ah ha my Mistresses,
    Which of you all will now refuse to dance?
    Shee that makes daintie, shee Ile sweare hath Corns.               5
    Am I come neere you now, welcome Gentlemen, welcome,
    More lights you knaues, & turn these tables vp,
    And quench the fire the roome is growne too hote.
    Ah sirra, this vnlookt for sport comes well,
    Nay sit, nay sit, good Cosen _Capulet_:                           10
    For you and I are past our standing dayes,
    How long is it since you and I were in a Maske?

    _Cos_: By Ladie sir tis thirtie yeares at least.

    _Cap_: Tis not so much, tis not so much.
    Tis since the mariage of _Lucentio_,                              15
    Come _Pentecost_ as quicklie as it will,
    Some fiue and twentie yeares, and then we maskt.

    _Cos_: Tis more, tis more, his sonne is elder far.

    _Cap_: Will you tell me that it cannot be so,
    His sonne was but a Ward three yeares agoe,
    Good youths I faith. Oh youth's a iolly thing.

    _Rom_: What Ladie is that that doth inrich the hand
    Of yonder Knight? O shee doth teach the torches to burne bright!
    It seemes she hangs vpon the cheeke of night,
    Like a rich iewell in an _Aethiops_ eare,                         25
    Beautie too rich for vse, for earth too deare:
    So shines a snow-white Swan trouping with Crowes,
    As this faire Ladie ouer her fellowes showes.
    The measure done, ile watch her place of stand,
    And touching hers, make happie my rude hand.                      30
    Did my heart loue till now? Forsweare it sight,
    I neuer saw true beautie till this night.

    _Tib_: This by his voice should be a _Mountague_,
    Fetch me my rapier boy. What dares the slaue
    Come hither couer'd with an Anticke face,                         35
    To scorne and ieere at our solemnitie?
    Now by the stocke and honor of my kin,
    To strike him dead I hold it for no sin.

    _Ca_: Why how now cosen, wherfore storme you so.

    _Ti_: Vncle this is a _Mountague_ our foe,                        40
    A villaine that is hether come in spight,
    To mocke at our solemnitie this night.

    _Ca_: Young _Romeo_, is it not?

    _Ti_: It is that villaine _Romeo_.

    _Ca_: Let him alone, he beares him like a portly gentleman,       45
    And to speake truth, _Verona_ brags of him,
    As of a vertuous and well gouern'd youth:
    I would not for the wealth of all this towne,
    Here in my house doo him disparagement:
    Therefore be quiet take no note of him,                           50
    Beare a faire presence, and put off these frownes,
    An ill beseeming semblance for a feast.

    _Ti_: It fits when such a villaine is a guest,
    Ile not indure him.

    _Ca_: He shalbe indured, goe to I say, he shall.                  55
    Am I the Master of the house or you?
    You'le not indure him? God shall mend my soule
    You'le make a mutenie amongst my guests.
    You'le set Cocke a hoope, you'le be the man.

    _Ti_: Vncle tis a shame.                                          60

    _Ca_: Goe too, you are a saucie knaue.
    This tricke will scath you one day I know what.
    Well said my hartes. Be quiet:
    More light Ye knaue, or I will make you quiet.

    _Tibalt_: Patience perforce with wilfull choller meeting,         65
    Makes my flesh tremble in their different greetings:
    I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall
    Now seeming sweet, conuert to bitter gall.

    _Rom_: If I prophane with my vnworthie hand,
    This holie shrine, the gentle sinne is this:                      70
    My lips two blushing Pilgrims ready stand,
    To smooth the rough touch with a gentle kisse.

    _Iuli_: Good Pilgrime you doe wrong your hand too much,
    Which mannerly deuotion shewes in this:
    For Saints haue hands which holy Palmers touch,                   75
    And Palme to Palme is holy Palmers kisse.

    _Rom_: Haue not Saints lips, and holy Palmers too?

    _Iuli_: Yes Pilgrime lips that they must vse in praier.

    _Ro_: Why then faire saint, let lips do what hands doo,
    They pray, yeeld thou, least faith turne to dispaire.             80

    _Iu_: Saints doe not mooue though: grant nor praier forsake.

    _Ro_: Then mooue not till my praiers effect I take.
    Thus from my lips, by yours my sin is purgde.

    _Iu_: Then haue my lips the sin that they haue tooke.

    _Ro_: Sinne from my lips, O trespasse sweetly vrgde!              85
    Giue me my sinne againe.

    _Iu_: You kisse by the booke.

    Nurse: _Madame your mother calles._

    _Rom_: What is her mother?

    Nurse: _Marrie Batcheler her mother is the Ladie of the_          90
    _house, and a good Lady, and a wise, and a vertuous. I nurst_
    _her daughter that you talkt withall, I tell you, he that can_
    _lay hold of her shall haue the chinkes._

    _Rom_: Is she a _Mountague_? Oh deare account,
    My life is my foes thrall.                                        95

    _Ca_: Nay gentlemen prepare not to be gone,
    We haue a trifling foolish banquet towards.

                      _They whisper in his eare._

    I pray you let me intreat you. Is it so?
    Well then _I_ thanke you honest Gentlemen,
    I promise you but for your company,                              100
    I would haue bin a bed an houre agoe:
    Light to my chamber hoe.                                  _Exeunt._

    _Iul_: Nurse, what is yonder Gentleman?

    _Nur_: _The sonne and heire of old_ Tiberio.

    _Iul_: Whats he that now is going out of dore?                   105

    _Nur_: _That as I thinke is yong_ Petruchio.

    _Iul_: Whats he that followes there that would not dance?

    _Nur_: _I know not._

    _Iul_: Goe learne his name, if he be maried,
    My graue is like to be my wedding bed.                           110

    _Nur_: _His name is_ Romeo _and a_ Mountague, _the onely_
    _sonne of your great enemie._

    _Iul_: My onely Loue sprung from my onely hate,
    Too early seene vnknowne, and knowne too late:
    Prodigious birth of loue is this to me,                          115
    That I should loue a loathed enemie.

    Nurse: _Whats this? whats that?_

    _Iul_: Nothing Nurse but a rime I learnt euen now of oue I dancst with.

    Nurse: _Come your mother staies for you, Ile goe a long_
    _with you._              _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. VI.]]

                          _Enter Romeo alone._

    _Ro_: Shall I goe forward and my heart is here?
    Turne backe dull earth and finde thy Center out.

                       _Enter Benuolio Mercutio_.

    _Ben: Romeo_, my cosen _Romeo_.

    _Mer_: Doest thou heare he is wise,
    Vpon my life he hath stolne him home to bed.                       5

    _Ben_: He came this way, and leapt this Orchard wall.
    Call good _Mercutio._

    _Mer_: Call, nay Ile coniure too.

    _Romeo_, madman, humors, passion, liuer, appeare thou in
    likenes of a sigh: speek but one rime & I am satisfied, cry       10
    but ay me. Pronounce but Loue and Doue, speake to
    my gossip _Venus_ one faire word, one nickname for her
    purblinde sonne and heire young _Abraham: Cupid_ hee
    that shot so trim when young King _Cophetua_ loued the
    begger wench. Hee heares me not. I coniure thee by                15
    _Rosalindes_ bright eye, high forehead, and scarlet lip, her
    prettie foote, straight leg, and quiuering thigh, and the
    demaines that there adiacent lie, that in thy likenesse
    thou appeare to vs.

    _Ben_: If he doe heare thee thou wilt anger him.                  20

    _Mer_: Tut this cannot anger him, marrie if one shuld
    raise a spirit in his Mistris circle of some strange fashion,
    making it there to stand till she had laid it, and coniurde
    it downe, that were some spite. My inuocation is faire
    and honest, and in his Mistris name I coniure onely but           25
    to raise vp him.

    _Ben_: Well he hath hid himselfe amongst those trees,
    To be consorted with the humerous night,
    Blinde in his loue, and best befits the darke.

    _Mer_: If loue be blind, loue will not hit the marke,             30
    Now will he sit vnder a Medler tree,
    And wish his Mistris were that kinde of fruite,
    As maides call Medlers when they laugh alone.
    Ah _Romeo_ that she were, ah that she were
    An open _Et cÃ¦tera_, thou a poprin Peare.                         35
    _Romeo_ God night, il'e to my trundle bed:
    This field bed is too cold for mee.
    Come lets away, for tis but vaine,
    To seeke him here that meanes not to be found.

    _Ro_: He iests at scars that neuer felt a wound:                  40
    But soft, what light forth yonder window breakes?
    It is the East, and _Iuliet_ is the Sunne,
    Arise faire Sunne, and kill the enuious Moone
    That is alreadie sicke, and pale with griefe:
    That thou her maid, art far more faire than she.                  45
    Be not her maide since she is enuious,
    Her vestall liuerie is but pale and greene,
    And none but fooles doe weare it, cast it off.
    She speakes, but she sayes nothing. What of that?
    Her eye discourseth, I will answere it.                           50
    I am too bold, tis not to me she speakes,
    Two of the fairest starres in all the skies,
    Hauing some busines, doe entreat her eyes
    To twinckle in their spheares till they returne.
    What if her eyes were there, they in her head,                    55
    The brightnes of her cheekes would shame those stars:
    As day-light doth a Lampe, her eyes in heauen,
    Would through the airie region streame so bright,
    That birdes would sing, and thinke it were not night.
    Oh now she leanes her cheekes vpon her hand,                      60
    I would I were the gloue to that same hand,
    That I might kisse that cheeke.

    _Iul_: Ay me.

    _Rom_: She speakes, Oh speake againe bright Angell:
    For thou art as glorious to this night beeing ouer my head,       65
    As is a winged messenger of heauen
    Vnto the white vpturned woondring eyes,
    Of mortals that fall backe to gaze on him,
    When he bestrides the lasie pacing cloudes,
    And sailes vpon the bosome of the aire.                           70

    _Iul_: Ah _Romeo, Romeo_, wherefore art thou _Romeo?_
    Denie thy Father, and refuse thy name,
    Or if thou wilt not be but sworne my loue,
    And il'e no longer be a _Capulet_.

    _Rom_: Shall I heare more, or shall I speake to this?             75

    _Iul_: Tis but thy name that is mine enemie.
    Whats _Mountague_? It is nor hand nor foote,
    Nor arme, nor face, nor any other part.
    Whats in a name? That which we call a Rose,
    By any other name would smell as sweet:                           80
    So _Romeo_ would, were he not _Romeo_ cald,
    Retaine the diuine perfection he owes:
    Without that title _Romeo_ part thy name,
    And for that name which is no part of thee,
    Take all I haue.                                                  85

    _Rom_: I take thee at thy word,
    Call me but loue, and il'e be new Baptisde,
    Henceforth I neuer will be _Romeo_.

    _Iu_: What man art thou, that thus beskrind in night,
    Doest stumble on my counsaile?                                    90

    _Ro_: By a name I know not how to tell thee.
    My name deare Saint is hatefull to my selfe,
    Because it is an enemie to thee.
    Had I it written I would teare the word.

    _Iul_: My eares haue not yet drunk a hundred words                95
    Of that tongues vtterance, yet I know the sound:
    Art thou not _Romeo_ and a _Mountague_?

    _Ro_: Neyther faire Saint, if eyther thee displease.

    _Iu_: How camst thou hether, tell me and wherfore?
    The Orchard walles are high and hard to clime,                   100
    And the place death considering who thou art,
    If any of my kinsmen finde thee here.

    _Ro_: By loues light winges did I oreperch these wals,
    For stonie limits cannot hold loue out,
    And what loue can doo, that dares loue attempt,                  105
    Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

    _Iul_: If they doe finde thee they will murder thee.

    _Ro_: Alas there lies more perrill in thine eyes,
    Then twentie of their swords, looke thou but sweete,
    And I am proofe against their enmitie.                           110

    _Iul_: I would not for the world they shuld find thee here.

    _Ro_: I haue nights cloak to hide thee from their sight,
    And but thou loue me let them finde me here:
    For life were better ended by their hate,
    Than death proroged wanting of thy loue.                         115

    _Iul_: By whose directions foundst thou out this place.

    _Ro_: By loue, who first did prompt me to enquire,
    I he gaue me counsaile and I lent him eyes.
    I am no Pilot: yet wert thou as farre
    As that vast shore, washt with the furthest sea,                 120
    I would aduenture for such Marchandise.

    _Iul_: Thou knowst the maske of night is on my face,
    Els would a Maiden blush bepaint my cheeks:
    For that which thou haste heard me speake to night,
    Faine would I dwell on forme, faine faine denie,                 125
    What I haue spoke: but farewell complements.
    Doest thou loue me? Nay I know thou wilt say I,
    And I will take thy word: but if thou swearst,
    Thou maiest proue false:
    At Louers periuries they say Ioue smiles.                        130
    Ah gentle _Romeo_, if thou loue pronounce it faithfully:
    Or if thou thinke I am too easely wonne,
    Il'e frowne and say thee nay and be peruerse,
    So thou wilt wooe: but els not for the world,
    In truth faire _Mountague_, I am too fond,                       135
    And therefore thou maiest thinke my hauiour light:
    But trust me gentleman Ile proue more true,
    Than they that haue more cunning to be strange.
    I should haue bin strange I must confesse,
    But that thou ouer-heardst ere I was ware                        140
    My true loues Passion: therefore pardon me,
    And not impute this yeelding to light loue,
    Which the darke night hath so discouered.

    _Ro_: By yonder blessed Moone I sweare,
    That tips with siluer all these fruit trees tops.                145

    _Iul_: O sweare not by the Moone the vnconstant Moone,
    That monthlie changeth in her circled orbe,
    Least that thy loue proue likewise variable.

    _Ro_: Now by

    _Iul_: Nay doo not sweare at all,                                150
    Or if thou sweare, sweare by thy glorious selfe,
    Which art the God of my Idolatrie,
    And il'e beleeue thee.

    _Ro_: If my true harts loue

    _Iul_: Sweare not at al, though I doo ioy in thee,               155
    I haue small ioy in this contract to night,
    It is too rash, too sodaine, too vnaduisde,
    Too like the lightning that doth cease to bee
    Ere one can say it lightens. I heare some comming,
    Deare loue adew, sweet _Mountague_ be true,                      160
    Stay but a little and il'e come againe.

    _Ro_: O blessed blessed night, I feare being night,
    All this is but a dreame I heare and see,
    Too flattering true to be substantiall.

    _Iul_: Three wordes good _Romeo_ and good night indeed.          165
    If that thy bent of loue be honourable,
    Thy purpose marriage, send me word to morrow
    By one that il'e procure to come to thee:
    Where and what time thou wilt performe that right,
    And al my fortunes at thy foote il'e lay,                        170
    And follow thee my Lord through out the world.

    _Ro_: Loue goes toward loue like schoole boyes from their bookes,
    But loue from loue, to schoole with heauie lookes.

    _Iul: Romeo, Romeo_, O for a falkners voice,
    To lure this Tassell gentle backe againe:                        175
    Bondage is hoarse and may not crie aloud,
    Els would I teare the Caue where Eccho lies
    And make her airie voice as hoarse as mine,
    With repetition of my _Romeos_ name.
    _Romeo?_                                                         180

    _Ro_: It is my soule that calles vpon my name,
    How siluer sweet sound louers tongues in night.

    _Iul_: Romeo?

    _Ro_: Madame.

    _Iul_: At what a clocke to morrow shall I send?                  185

    _Ro_: At the houre of nine.

    _Iul_: I will not faile, tis twentie yeares till then.
    _Romeo_ I haue forgot why I did call thee backe.

    _Rom_: Let me stay here till you remember it.

    _Iul_: I shall forget to haue thee still staie here,             190
    Remembring how I loue thy companie.

    _Rom_: And il'e stay still to haue thee still forget,
    Forgetting any other home but this.

    _Iu_: Tis almost morning I would haue thee gone,
    But yet no further then a wantons bird,                          195
    Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
    Like a pore prisoner in his twisted giues,
    And with a silke thred puls it backe againe,
    Too louing iealous of his libertie.

    _Ro_: Would I were thy bird.                                     200

    _Iul_: Sweet so would I,
    Yet I should kill thee with much cherrishing thee.
    Good night, good night, parting is such sweet sorrow,
    That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

    _Rom_: Sleepe dwell vpon thine eyes, peace on thy breast,        205
    I would that I were sleep and peace of sweet to rest.
    Now will I to my Ghostly fathers Cell,
    His help to craue, and my good hap to tell.


[Sidenote: [SC. VII.]]

                         _Enter Frier Francis._

    _Frier_: The gray ey'd morne smiles on the frowning night,
    Checkring the Easterne clouds with streakes of light,
    And flecked darkenes like a drunkard reeles,
    From forth daies path, and _Titans_ fierie wheeles:
    Now ere the Sunne aduance his burning eye,                         5
    The world to cheare, and nights darke dew to drie.
    We must vp fill this oasier Cage of ours,
    With balefull weeds, and precious iuyced flowers.
    Oh mickle is the powerfull grace that lies
    In hearbes, plants, stones, and their true qualities:             10
    For nought so vile, that vile on earth doth liue,
    But to the earth some speciall good doth giue:
    Nor nought so good, but straind from that faire use,
    Reuolts to vice and stumbles on abuse:
    Vertue it selfe turnes vice being misapplied,                     15
    And vice sometimes by action dignified.
    Within the infant rinde of this small flower,
    Poyson hath residence, and medecine power:
    For this being smelt too, with that part cheares ech hart,
    Being tasted slaies all sences with the hart.                     20
    Two such opposed foes incampe them still,
    In man as well as herbes, grace and rude will,
    And where the worser is predominant,
    Full soone the canker death eats vp that plant.

    _Rom_: Good morrow to my Ghostly Confessor.                       25

    _Fri: Benedicite_, what earlie tongue so soone saluteth me?
    Yong sonne it argues a distempered head,
    So soone to bid good morrow to my bed.
    Care keepes his watch in euerie old mans eye,
    And where care lodgeth, sleep can neuer lie:                      30
    But where vnbrused youth with vnstuft braines
    Doth couch his limmes, there golden sleepe remaines:
    Therefore thy earlines doth me assure,
    Thou art vprows'd by some distemperature.
    Or if not so, then here I hit it right                            35
    Our _Romeo_ hath not bin a bed to night.

    _Ro_: The last was true, the sweeter rest was mine.

    _Fr_: God pardon sin, wert thou with _Rosaline_?

    _Ro_: With _Rosaline_ my Ghostly father no,
    I haue forgot that name, and that names woe.                      40

    _Fri_: Thats my good sonne: but where hast thou bin then?

    _Ro_: I tell thee ere thou aske it me againe,
    I haue bin feasting with mine enemie:
    Where on the sodaine one hath wounded mee
    Thats by me wounded, both our remedies
    With in thy help and holy phisicke lies,
    I beare no hatred blessed man: for loe
    My intercession likewise steades my foe.

    _Frier_: Be plaine my sonne and homely in thy drift,
    Ridling confession findes but ridling shrift.                     50

    _Rom_: Then plainely know my harts deare loue is set
    On the faire daughter of rich _Capulet_:
    As mine on hers, so hers likewise on mine,
    And all combind, saue what thou must combine
    By holy marriage: where, and when, and how,                       55
    We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vowes,
    Il'e tell thee as I passe: But this I pray,
    That thou consent to marrie vs to day.

    _Fri_: Holy _S. Francis_, what a change is here?
    Is R_osaline_ whome thou didst loue so deare                      60
    So soone forsooke, lo yong mens loue then lies
    Not truelie in their harts, but in their eyes.
    _Iesu Maria_, what a deale of brine
    Hath washt thy sallow cheekes for _Rosaline_?
    How much salt water cast away in waste,                           65
    To season loue, that of loue doth not taste.
    The sunne not yet thy sighes from heauen cleares,
    Thy old grones ring yet in my ancient eares,
    And loe vpon thy cheeke the staine doth sit,
    Of an old teare that is not washt off yet.                        70
    If euer thou wert thus, and these woes thine,
    Thou and these woes were all for _Rosaline_,
    And art thou changde, pronounce this sentence then
    Women may fal, when ther's no strength in men.

    _Rom_: Thou chidst me oft for louing _Rosaline_.                  75

    _Fr_: For doating, not for louing, pupill mine.

    _Rom_: And badst me burie loue.

    _Fr_: Not in a graue,
    To lay one in another out to haue.

    _Rom_: I pree thee chide not, she whom I loue now                 80
    Doth grace for grace, and loue for loue allow:
    The other did not so.

    _Fr_: Oh she knew well
    Thy loue did read by rote, and could not spell.
    But come young Wauerer, come goe with mee,                        85
    In one respect Ile thy assistant bee:
    For this alliaunce may so happie proue,
    To turne your Housholds rancour to pure loue.      _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. VIII.]]

                      _Enter Mercutio, Benuolio._

    _Mer_: Why whats become of _Romeo?_ came he not home to night?

    _Ben_: Not to his Fathers, I spake with his man.

    _Mer_: Ah that same pale hard hearted wench, that _Rosaline_,
    Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

    _Mer: Tybalt_ the Kinsman of olde _Capolet_                        5
    Hath sent a Letter to his Fathers House:
    Some Challenge on my life.

    _Ben: Romeo_ will answere it.

    _Mer_: I, anie man that can write may answere a letter.

    _Ben_: Nay, he will answere the letters master if hee bee
        challenged.                                                   10

    _Mer_: Who, _Romeo_? why he is alreadie dead: stabd
    with a white wenches blacke eye, shot thorough the eare
    with a loue song, the verie pinne of his heart cleft with the
    blinde bow-boyes but-shaft. And is he a man to encounter
    _Tybalt_?                                                         15

    _Ben_: Why what is _Tybalt?_

    _Mer_: More than the prince of cattes I can tell you. Oh
    he is the couragious captaine of complements. Catso, he
    fightes as you sing pricke-song, keepes time dystance and
    proportion, rests me his minum rest one two and the thirde        20
    in your bosome, the very butcher of a silken button, a Duellist
    a Duellist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first
    and second cause, ah the immortall Passado, the Punto reuerso,
    the Hay.

    _Ben_: The what?                                                  25

    _Me_: The Poxe of such limping antique affecting fantasticoes
    these new tuners of accents. By Iesu a very good
    blade, a very tall man, a very good whoore. Why graundsir
    is not this a miserable case that we should be stil afflicted
    with these strange flies: these fashionmongers, these pardonmees,  30
    that stand so much on the new forme, that they
    cannot sitte at ease on the old bench. Oh their bones, theyr
    bones.

    _Ben._ Heere comes _Romeo_.

    _Mer_: Without his Roe, like a dryed Hering. O flesh flesh        35
    how art thou fishified. Sirra now is he for the numbers that
    _Petrarch_ flowdin: _Laura_ to his Lady was but a kitchin
    drudg, yet she had a better loue to berime her: Dido a dowdy
    Cleopatra a Gypsie, _Hero_ and _Hellen_ hildings and harletries:
    _Thisbie_ a gray eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior       40
    _Romeo_ bon iour, there is a French curtesie to your French
    slop: yee gaue vs the counterfeit fairely yesternight.

    _Rom_: What counterfeit I pray you?

    _Me_: The slip the slip, can you not conceiue?

    _Rom_: I cry you mercy my busines was great, and in such          45
    a case as mine, a man may straine curtesie.

    _Mer_: Oh thats as much to say as such a case as yours wil
    constraine a man to bow in the hams.

    _Rom_: A most curteous exposition.

    _Me_: Why I am the very pinke of curtesie.                        50

    _Rom_: Pinke for flower?

    _Mer_: Right.

    _Rom_: Then is my Pumpe well flour'd:

    _Mer_: Well said, follow me nowe that iest till thou hast
    worne out thy Pumpe, that when the single sole of it is worn      55
    the iest may remaine after the wearing solie singuler.

    _Rom_: O single soald iest solie singuler for the singlenes.

    _Me_: Come between vs good _Benuolio_, for my wits faile.

    _Rom_: Swits and spurres, swits & spurres, or Ile cry a match.

    _Mer_: Nay if thy wits runne the wildgoose chase, I haue          60
    done: for I am sure thou hast more of the goose in one of
    thy wits, than I haue in all my fiue: Was I with you there for
    the goose?

    _Rom_: Thou wert neuer with me for any thing, when
    thou wert not with me for the goose.                              65

    _Me_: Ile bite thee by the eare for that iest.

    _Rom_: Nay good goose bite not.

    _Mer_: Why thy wit is a bitter sweeting, a most sharp sauce

    _Rom_: And was it not well seru'd in to a sweet goose?

    _Mer_: Oh heere is a witte of Cheuerell that stretcheth           70
    from an ynch narrow to an ell broad.

    _Rom_: I stretcht it out for the word broad, which added to
    the goose, proues thee faire and wide a broad goose.

    _Mer_: Why is not this better now than groning for loue?
    why now art thou sociable, now art thou thy selfe, nowe art       75
    thou what thou art, as wel by arte as nature. This driueling
    loue is like a great naturall, that runs vp and downe to hide
    his bable in a hole.

    _Ben_: Stop there.

    _Me_: Why thou wouldst haue me stopp my tale against              80
    the haire.

    _Ben_: Thou wouldst haue made thy tale too long?

    _Mer_: Tut man thou art deceiued, I meant to make it
    short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale? and
    meant indeed to occupie the argument no longer.                   85

    _Rom_: Heers goodly geare.

                       _Enter Nurse and her man._

    _Mer_: A saile, a saile, a saile.

    _Ben_: Two, two, a shirt and a smocke.

    _Nur: Peter_, pree thee giue me my fan.

    _Mer_: Pree thee doo good _Peter_, to hide her face: for          90
    her fanne is the fairer of the two.

    _Nur_: God ye goodmorrow Gentlemen.

    _Mer_: God ye good den faire Gentlewoman.

    _Nur_: Is it godyegooden I pray you.

    _Mer_: Tis no lesse I assure you, for the baudie hand of          95
    the diall is euen now vpon the pricke of noone.

    _Nur_: Fie, what a man is this?

    _Rom_: A Gentleman Nurse, that God hath made for
    himselfe to marre.

    _Nur_: By my troth well said: for himselfe to marre              100
    quoth he? I pray you can anie of you tell where one maie
    finde yong _Romeo_?

    _Rom_: I can: but yong _Romeo_ will bee elder when you
    haue found him, than he was when you sought him. I am
    the yongest of that name for fault of a worse.                   105

    _Nur_: Well said.

    _Mer_: Yea, is the worst well? mas well noted, wisely,
    wisely.

    _Nu_: If you be he sir, I desire some conference with ye.

    _Ben_: O, belike she meanes to inuite him to supper.             110

    _Mer_: So ho. A baud, a baud, a baud.

    _Rom_: Why what hast found man?

    _Mer_: No hare sir, vnlesse it be a hare in a lenten pye,
    that is somewhat stale and hoare ere it be eaten.

                    _He walkes by them, and sings._

              And an olde hare hore, and an olde hare hore           115
                is verie good meate in Lent:
              But a hare thats hoare is too much for a score,
                if it hore ere it be spent.

    Youl come to your fathers to supper?

    _Rom_: I will.                                                   120

    _Mer_: Farewell ancient Ladie, farewell sweete Ladie.

                      _Exeunt Benuolio, Mercutio._

    _Nur_: Marry farewell. Pray what saucie merchant was
    this that was so full of his roperipe?

    _Rom_: A gentleman Nurse that loues to heare himselfe
    talke, and will speake more in an houre than hee will stand
    to in a month.                                                   125

    _Nur_: If he stand to anie thing against mee, Ile take
    him downe if he were lustier than he is: if I cannot take him
    downe, Ile finde them that shall: I am none of his flurtgills,
    I am none of his skaines mates.                                  130

                     _She turnes to Peter her man._

    And thou like a knaue must stand by, and see euery Iacke
    vse me at his pleasure.

    _Pet_: I see no bodie vse you at his pleasure, if I had, I
    would soone haue drawen: you know my toole is as soone
    out as anothers if I see time and place.                         135

    _Nur_: Now afore God he hath so vext me, that euerie
    member about me quiuers: scuruie Iacke. But as I said, my
    Ladie bad me seeke ye out, and what shee bad me tell yee,
    that Ile keepe to my selfe: but if you should lead her into a
    fooles paradice as they saye, it were a verie grosse kinde of    140
    behauiour as they say, for the Gentlewoman is yong. Now
    if you should deale doubly with her, it were verie weake
    dealing, and not to be offered to anie Gentlewoman.

    _Rom_: Nurse, commend me to thy Ladie, tell her I
    protest.                                                         145

    _Nur_: Good heart: yfaith Ile tell her so: oh she will be
    a ioyfull woman.

    _Rom_: Why, what wilt thou tell her?

    _Nur_: That you doo protest: which (as I take it) is a
    Gentlemanlike proffer.                                           150

    _Rom_: Bid her get leaue to morrow morning
    To come to shrift to Frier _Laurence_ cell:
    And stay thou Nurse behinde the Abbey wall,
    My man shall come to thee, and bring along
    The cordes, made like a tackled staire,                          155
    Which to the high top-gallant of my ioy
    Must be my conduct in the secret night.
    Hold, take that for thy paines.

    _Nur_: No, not a penie truly.

    _Rom_: I say you shall not chuse.                                160

    _Nur_: Well, to morrow morning she shall not faile.

    _Rom_: Farewell, be trustie, and Ile quite thy paine.      _Exit._

    _Nur: Peter_, take my fanne, and goe before.      _Ex. omnes._


[Sidenote: [SC. IX.]]

                            _Enter Iuliet._

    _Jul_: The clocke stroke nine when I did send my Nursse
    In halfe an houre she promist to returne.
    Perhaps she cannot finde him. Thats not so.
    Oh she is lazie, Loues heralds should be thoughts,
    And runne more swift, than hastie powder fierd,                    5
    Doth hurrie from the fearfull Cannons mouth.

                             _Enter Nurse._

    Oh now she comes. Tell me gentle Nurse,
    What sayes my Loue?

    _Nur_: Oh I am wearie, let mee rest a while. Lord how
    my bones ake. Oh wheres my man? Giue me some aqua                 10
    vitÃ¦.

    _Iul_: I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy newes.

    _Nur_: Fie, what a iaunt haue I had: and my backe a tother
    side. Lord, Lord, what a case am I in.

    _Jul_: But tell me sweet Nurse, what sayes _Romeo_?               15

    _Nur: Romeo_, nay, alas you cannot chuse a man. Hees
    no bodie, he is not the Flower of curtesie, he is not a proper
    man: and for a hand, and a foote, and a baudie, wel go thy
    way wench, thou hast it ifaith. Lord, Lord, how my head
    beates?                                                           20

    _Iul_: What of all this? tell me what sayes he to our
    mariage?

    _Nur_: Marry he sayes like an honest Gentleman, and a
    kinde, and I warrant a vertuous: wheres your Mother?

    _Iul_: Lord, Lord, how odly thou repliest? He saies like a        25
    kinde Gentleman, and an honest, and a vertuous; wheres
    your mother?

    _Nur_: Marry come vp, cannot you stay a while? is this
    the poultesse for mine aking boanes? next arrant youl haue
    done, euen doot your selfe.                                       30

    _Iul_: Nay stay sweet Nurse, I doo intreate thee now,
    What sayes my Loue, my Lord, my _Romeo_?

    _Nur_: Goe, hye you straight to Friar _Laurence_ Cell,
    And frame a scuse that you must goe to shrift:
    There stayes a Bridegroome to make you a Bride.                   35
    Now comes the wanton blood vp in your cheekes,
    I must prouide a ladder made of cordes,
    With which your Lord must clime a birdes nest soone.
    I must take paines to further your delight,
    But you must beare the burden soone at night.                     40
    Doth this newes please you now?

    _Iul_: How doth her latter words reuiue my hart.
    Thankes gentle Nurse, dispatch thy busines,
    And Ile not faile to meete my _Romeo_.       _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. X.]]

                         _Enter Romeo, Frier._

    _Rom_: Now Father _Laurence_, in thy holy grant
    Consists the good of me and _Iuliet_.

    _Fr_: Without more words I will doo all I may,
    To make you happie if in me it lye.

    _Rom_: This morning here she pointed we should meet,               5
    And consumate those neuer parting bands,
    Witnes of our harts loue by ioyning hands.
    And come she will.

    _Fr_: I gesse she will indeed,
    Youths loue is quicke, swifter than swiftest speed.               10

           _Enter Iuliet somewhat fast, and embraceth Romeo._

    See where she comes.
    So light of foote nere hurts the troden flower:
    Of loue and ioy, see see the soueraigne power.

    _Iul: Romeo._

    _Rom_: My _Iuliet_ welcome. As doo waking eyes                    15
    (Cloasd in Nights mysts) attend the frolicke Day,
    So _Romeo_ hath expected _Iuliet_,
    And thou art come.

    _Jul_: I am (if I be Day)
    Come to my Sunne: shine foorth, and make me faire.                20

    _Rom_: All beauteous fairnes dwelleth in thine eyes.

    _Iul: Romeo_ from thine all brightnes doth arise.

    _Fr_: Come wantons, come, the stealing houres do passe
    Defer imbracements till some fitrer time,
    Part for a while, you shall not be alone,                         25
    Till holy Church haue ioynd ye both in one.

    _Rom_: Lead holy Father, all delay seemes long.

    _Iul_: Make hast, make hast, this lingring doth vs wrong.

    _Fr_: O, soft and faire makes sweetest worke they say.
    Hast is a common hindrer in crosse way.      _Exeunt omnes._      30


[Sidenote: [SC. XI.]]

                      _Enter Benuolio, Mercutio._

    _Ben_: I pree thee good _Mercutio_ lets retire,
    The day is hot, the _Capels_ are abroad.

    _Mer_: Thou art like one of those, that when hee comes
    into the confines of a tauerne, claps me his rapier on the
    boord, and sayes, God send me no need of thee: and by              5
    the operation of the next cup of wine, he drawes it on the
    drawer, when indeed there is no need.

    _Ben_: Am I like such a one?

    _Mer_: Go too, thou art as hot a Iacke being mooude,
    and as soone mooude to be moodie, and as soone moodie to          10
    be mooud.

    _Ben_: And what too?

    _Mer_: Nay, and there were two such, wee should haue
    none shortly. Didst not thou fall out with a man for cracking
    of nuts, hauing no other reason, but because thou hadst           15
    hasill eyes? what eye but such an eye would haue pickt out
    such a quarrell? With another for coughing, because hee
    wakd thy dogge that lay a sleepe in the Sunne? With a
    Taylor for wearing his new dublet before Easter: and
    with another for tying his new shoes with olde ribands.
    And yet thou wilt forbid me of quarrelling.

    _Ben_: By my head heere comes a _Capolet_.

                            _Enter Tybalt._

    _Mer_: By my heele I care not.

    _Tyb_: Gentlemen a word with one of you.

    _Mer_: But one word with one of vs? You had best couple           25
    it with somewhat, and make it a word and a blow.

    _Tyb_: I am apt enough to that if I haue occasion.

    _Mer_: Could you not take occasion?

    _Tyb: Mercutio_ thou consorts with _Romeo_?

    _Mer_: Consort. Zwounes consort? the slaue wil make fidlers       30
    of vs. If you doe sirra, look for nothing but discord: For
    heeres my fiddle-sticke.

                             _Enter Romeo._

    _Tyb_: Well peace be with you, heere comes my man.

    _Mer_: But Ile be hanged if he weare your lyuery: Mary
    go before into the field, and he may be your follower, so in      35
    that sence your worship may call him man.

    _Tyb: Romeo_ the hate I beare to thee can affoord no better
    words then these, thou art a villaine.

    _Rom: Tybalt_ the loue I beare to thee, doth excuse the
    appertaining rage to such a word: villaine am I none, therfore    40
    I well perceiue thou knowst me not.

    _Tyb_: Bace boy this cannot serue thy turne, and therefore
    drawe.

    _Ro_: I doe protest I neuer iniured thee, but loue thee better
    than thou canst deuise, till thou shall know the reason of        45
    my loue.

    _Mer_: O dishonorable vile submission. _Allastockado_ caries
    it away. You Ratcatcher, come backe, come backe.

    _Tyb_: What wouldest with me?

    _Mer_: Nothing King of Cates, but borrow one of your              50
    nine liues, therefore come drawe your rapier out of your
    scabard, least mine be about your eares ere you be aware.

    _Rom_: Stay _Tibalt_, hould _Mercutio: Benuolio_ beate
    downe their weapons.

              _Tibalt vnder Romeos arme thrusts Mercutio,_
                            _in and flyes._

    _Mer_: Is he gone, hath hee nothing? A poxe on your               55
    houses.

    _Rom_: What art thou hurt man, the wound is not deepe.

    _Mer_: Noe not so deepe as a Well, nor so wide as a
    barne doore, but it will serue I warrant. What meant you to
    come betweene vs? I was hurt vnder your arme.                     60

    _Rom_: I did all for the best.

    _Mer_: Apoxe of your houses, I am fairely drest. Sirra
    goe fetch me a Surgeon.

    _Boy_: I goe my Lord.

    _Mer_: I am pepperd for this world, I am sped yfaith, he          65
    hath made wormes meate of me, & ye aske for me to morrow
    you shall finde me a graue-man. A poxe of your houses,
    I shall be fairely mounted vpon foure mens shoulders: For
    your house of the _Mountegues_ and the _Capolets_: and then
    some peasantly rogue, some Sexton, some base slaue shall          70
    write my Epitapth, that _Tybalt_ came and broke the Princes
    Lawes, and _Mercutio_ was slaine for the first and second
    cause. Wher's the Surgeon?

    _Boy_: Hee's come sir.

    _Mer_: Now heele keepe a mumbling in my guts on the               75
    other side, come _Benuolio_, lend me thy hand: a poxe of
    your houses.              _Exeunt._

    _Rom_: This Gentleman the Princes neere Alie.
    My very frend hath tane this mortall wound
    In my behalfe, my reputation staind                               80
    With _Tibalts_ slaunder, _Tybalt_ that an houre
    Hath beene my kinsman. Ah _Iuliet_
    Thy beautie makes me thus effeminate,
    And in my temper softens valors steele.

                           _Enter Benuolio._

    _Ben_: Ah _Romeo Romeo_ braue _Mercutio_ is dead,                 85
    That gallant spirit hath a spir'd the cloudes,
    Which too vntimely scornd the lowly earth.

    _Rom_: This daies black fate, on more daies doth depend
    This but begins what other dayes must end.

                            _Enter Tibalt._

    _Ben_: Heere comes the furious _Tibalt_ backe againe.             90

    _Rom_: A liue in tryumph and _Mercutio_ slaine?
    Away to heauen respectiue lenity:
    And fier eyed fury be my conduct now.
    Now _Tibalt_ take the villaine backe againe,
    Which late thou gau'st me: for _Mercutios_ soule,                 95
    Is but a little way aboue the cloudes,
    And staies for thine to beare him company.
    Or thou, or I, or both shall follow him.

                        _Fight, Tibalt falles._

    _Ben: Romeo_ away, thou seest that _Tibalt's_ slaine,
    The Citizens approach, away, begone
    Thou wilt be taken.

    _Rom_: Ah I am fortunes slaue.

                                                               _Exeunt._

                           _Enter Citizens._

    _Watch_: Wher's he that slue _Mercutio, Tybalt_ that villaine?

    _Ben_: There is that _Tybalt_.                                   105
    Vp sirra goe with vs[1594].

                     _Enter Prince, Capolets wife._

    _Pry_: Where be the vile beginners of this fray?

    _Ben_: Ah Noble Prince I can discouer all
    The most vnlucky mannage of this brawle.
    Heere lyes the man slaine by yong R_omeo_,                       110
    That slew thy kinsman braue _Mercutio_.

    _M: Tibalt, Tybalt_, O my brothers child,
    Vnhappie sight? Ah the blood is spilt
    Of my deare kinsman, Prince as thou art true:
    For blood of ours, shed bloud of _Mountagew_.                    115

    _Pry_: Speake _Benuolio_ who began this fray?

    _Ben: Tibalt_ heere slaine whom R_omeos_ hand did slay.
    R_omeo_ who spake him fayre bid him bethinke
    How nice the quarrell was.
    But _Tibalt_ still persisting in his wrong,                      120
    The stout _Mercutio_ drewe to calme the storme,
    Which R_omeo_ seeing cal'd stay Gentlemen,
    And on me cry'd, who drew to part their strife,
    And with his agill arme yong R_omeo_,
    As fast as tung crydepeace, sought peace to make.                125
    While they were enterchanging thrusts and blows,
    Vnder yong R_omeos_ laboring arme to part,
    The furious _Tybalt_ cast an enuious thrust,
    That rid the life of stout _Mercutio_.
    With that he fled, but presently return'd,                       130
    And with his rapier braued R_omeo_:
    That had but newly entertain'd reuenge.
    And ere I could draw forth my rapyer
    To part their furie, downe did _Tybalt_ fall,
    And this way R_omeo_ fled.                                       135

    _Mo_: He is a _Mountagew_ and speakes partiall,
    Some twentie of them fought in this blacke strife:
    And all those twenty could but kill one life.
    I doo intreate sweete Prince thoult iustice giue,
    _Romeo_ slew _Tybalt, Romeo_ may not liue.                       140

    _Prin_: And for that offence
    Immediately we doo exile him hence.
    I haue an interest in your hates proceeding,
    My blood for your rude braules doth lye a bleeding.
    But Ile amerce you with so large a fine,                         145
    That you shall all repent the losse of mine.
    I will be deafe to pleading and excuses,
    Nor teares nor prayers shall purchase for abuses.
    Pittie shall dwell and gouerne with vs still:
    Mercie to all but murdrers, pardoning none that kill.            150

                            _Exeunt omnes._


[Sidenote: [SC. XII.]]

                            _Enter Iuliet._

    _Iul_: Gallop apace you fierie footed steedes
    To _Phoebus_ mansion, such a Waggoner
    As _Phaeton_, would quickly bring you thether,
    And send in cloudie night immediately.

           _Enter Nurse wringing her hands, with the ladder_
                        _of cordes in her lap._

    But how now Nurse: O Lord, why lookst thou sad?                    5
    What hast thou there, the cordes?

    _Nur_: I, I, the cordes: alacke we are vndone,
    We are vndone, Ladie we are vndone.

    _Iul_: What diuell art thou that torments me thus?

    _Nurs_: Alack the day, hees dead, hees dead, hees dead.           10

    _Jul_: This torture should be roard in dismall hell.
    Can heauens be so enuious?

    _Nur: Romeo_ can if heauens cannot.
    I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes.
    God saue the sample, on his manly breast:                         15
    A bloodie coarse, a piteous bloodie coarse,
    All pale as ashes, I swounded at the sight.

    _Iul_: Ah _Romeo, Romeo_, what disaster hap
    Hath seuerd thee from thy true _Juliet_?
    Ah why should Heauen so much conspire with Woe,                   20
    Or Fate enuie our happie Marriage,
    So soone to sunder vs by timelesse Death?

    _Nur_: O _Tybalt, Tybalt_, the best frend I had,
    O honest _Tybalt_, curteous Gentleman.

    _Iul_: What storme is this that blowes so contrarie,              25
    Is _Tybalt_ dead, and _Romeo_ murdered:
    My deare loude cousen, and my dearest Lord.
    Then let the trumpet sound a generall doome
    These two being dead, then liuing is there none.

    _Nur: Tybalt_ is dead, and _Romeo_ banished,                      30
    _Romeo_ that murdred him is banished.

    _Iul_: Ah heauens, did _Romeos_ hand shed _Tybalts_ blood?

    _Nur_: It did, it did, alacke the day it did.

    _Iul_: O serpents hate, hid with a flowring face:
    O painted sepulcher, including filth.                             35
    Was neuer booke containing so foule matter,
    So fairly bound. Ah, what meant _Romeo_?

    _Nur_: There is no truth, no faith, no honestie in men:
    All false, all faithles, periurde, all forsworne.
    Shame come to _Romeo_.                                            40

    _Iul_: A blister on that tung, he was not borne to shame:
    Vpon his face Shame is ashamde to sit.
    But wherefore villaine didst thou kill my Cousen?
    That villaine Cousen would haue kild my husband.
    All this is comfort. But there yet remaines                       45
    Worse than his death, which faine I would forget:
    But ah, it presseth to my memorie,
    _Romeo_ is banished. Ah that word Banished
    Is worse than death. R_omeo_ is banished,
    Is Father, Mother, _Tybalt_, I_uliet_,                            50
    All killd, all slaine, all dead, all banished.
    Where are my Father and my Mother Nurse?

    _Nur_: Weeping and wayling ouer _Tybalts_ coarse.
    Will you goe to them?

    _Iul_: I, I, when theirs are spent,                               55
    Mine shall he shed for R_omeos_ banishment.

    _Nur_: Ladie, your R_omeo_ will be here to night,
    Ile to him, he is hid at _Laurence_ Cell.

    _Iul_: Doo so, and beare this Ring to my true Knight,
    And bid him come to take his last farewell.             _Exeunt._  60


[Sidenote: [SC. XIII.]]

                             _Enter Frier._

    _Fr_: R_omeo_ come forth, come forth thou fearfull man,
    Affliction is enamourd on thy parts,
    And thou art wedded to Calamitie.

                             _Enter Romeo._

    _Rom_: Father what newes, what is the Princes doome,
    What Sorrow craues acquaintance at our hands,                      5
    Which yet we know not.

    _Fr_: Too familiar
    Is my yong sonne with such sowre companie:
    I bring thee tidings of the Princes doome.

    _Rom_: What lesse than doomes day is the Princes doome?           10

    _Fr_: A gentler iudgement vanisht from his lips,
    Not bodies death, but bodies banishment.

    _Rom_: Ha, Banished? be mercifull, say death:
    For Exile hath more terror in his lookes,
    Than death it selfe, doo not say Banishment.                      15

    _Fr_: Hence from _Verona_ art thou banished:
    Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

    _Rom_: There is no world without _Verona_ walls,
    But purgatorie, torture, hell it selfe.
    Hence banished, is banisht from the world:                        20
    And world exilde is death. Calling death banishment,
    Thou cutst my head off with a golden axe,
    And smilest vpon the stroke that murders me.

    _Fr_: Oh monstrous sinne, O rude vnthankfulnes:
    Thy fault our law calls death, but the milde Prince               25
    (Taking thy part) hath rushd aside the law,
    And turnd that blacke word death to banishment:
    This is meere mercie, and thou seest it not.

    _Rom_: Tis torture and not mercie, heauen is heere
    Where _Iuliet_ liues: and euerie cat and dog,                     30
    And little mouse, euerie vnworthie thing
    Liue here in heauen, and may looke on her,
    But R_omeo_ may not. More validitie,
    More honourable state, more courtship liues
    In carrion flyes, than R_omeo_: they may seaze                    35
    On the white wonder of faire _Iuliets_ skinne,
    And steale immortall kisses from her lips;
    But R_omeo_ may not, he is banished.
    Flies may doo this, but I from this must flye.
    Oh Father hadst thou no strong poyson mixt,                       40
    No sharpe ground knife, no present meane of death,
    Though nere so meane, but banishment
    To torture me withall: ah, banished.
    O Frier, the damned vse that word in hell:
    Howling attends it. How hadst thou the heart,                     45
    Being a Diuine, a ghostly Confessor,
    A sinne absoluer, and my frend profest,
    To mangle me with that word, Banishment?

    _Fr_: Thou fond mad man, heare me but speake a word.

    _Rom_: O, thou wilt talke againe of Banishment.                   50

    _Fr_: Ile giue thee armour to beare off this word,
    Aduersities sweete milke, philosophie,
    To comfort thee though thou be banished.

    _Rom_: Yet Banished? hang vp philosophie,
    Vnlesse philosophie can make a _Juliet_,                          55
    Displant a Towne, reuerse a Princes doome,
    It helpes not, it prevailes not, talke no more.

    _Fr_: O, now I see that madmen haue no eares.

    _Rom_: How should they, when that wise men haue no eyes.

    _Fr_: Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.                     60

    _Rom_: Thou canst not speak of what thou dost not feele.
    Wert thou as young as I, _Iuliet_ thy Loue,
    An houre but married, _Tybalt_ murdred.
    Doting like me, and like me banished,
    Then mightst thou speake, then mightst thou teare thy hayre.      65
    And fall vpon the ground as I doe now,
    Taking the measure of an vnmade graue.

                            _Nurse knockes._

    _Fr_: R_omeo_ arise, stand vp thou wilt be taken,
    I heare one knocke, arise and get thee gone.

    _Nu_: Hoe Fryer.                                                  70

    _Fr_: Gods will what wilfulnes is this?

                         _Shee knockes againe._

    _Nur_: Hoe Fryer open the doore,

    _Fr_: By and by I come. Who is there?

    _Nur_: One from Lady _Iuliet_.

    _Fr_: Then come neare.                                            75

    _Nur_: Oh holy Fryer, tell mee oh holy Fryer,
    Where is my Ladies Lord? Wher's R_omeo_?

    _Fr_: There on the ground, with his owne teares made
    drunke.

    _Nur_: Oh he is euen in my Mistresse case.                        80
    Iust in her case. Oh wofull simpathy,
    Pitteous predicament, euen so lyes shee,
    Weeping and blubbring, blubbring and weeping:
    Stand vp, stand vp, stand and you be a man.
    For _Iuliets_ sake, for her sake rise and stand,                  85
    Why should you fall into so deep an _O._

                              _He rises._

    _Romeo_: Nurse.

    _Nur_: Ah sir, ah sir. Wel death's the end of all.

    _Rom_: Spakest thou of _Iuliet_, how is it with her?
    Doth she not thinke me an olde murderer,                          90
    Now I haue stainde the childhood of her ioy,
    With bloud remou'd but little from her owne?
    Where is she? and how doth she? And what sayes
    My conceal'd Lady to our canceld loue?

    _Nur_: Oh she saith nothing, but weepes and pules,                95
    And now fals on her bed, now on the ground,
    And _Tybalt_ cryes, and then on _Romeo_ calles.

    _Rom_: As if that name shot from the deadly leuel of a gun
    Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
    Murderd her kinsman. Ah tell me holy Fryer                       100
    In what vile part of this Anatomy
    Doth my name lye? Tell me that I may sacke
    The hatefull mansion?

            _He offers to stab himselfe, and Nurse snatches_
                           _the dagger away._

    _Nur_: Ah?

    _Fr_: Hold, stay thy hand: art thou a man? thy forme             105
    Cryes out thou art, but thy wilde actes denote
    The vnresonable furyes of a beast.
    Vnseemely woman in a seeming man,
    Or ill beseeming beast in seeming both.
    Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,                           110
    I thought thy disposition better temperd,
    Hast thou slaine _Tybalt_? wilt thou slay thy selfe?
    And slay thy Lady too, that liues in thee?
    Rouse vp thy spirits, thy Lady _Iuliet_ liues,
    For whose sweet sake thou wert but lately dead:                  115
    There art thou happy. _Tybalt_ would kill thee,
    But thou sluest _Tybalt_, there art thou happy too.
    A packe of blessings lights vpon thy backe,
    Happines Courts thee in his best array:
    But like a misbehaude and sullen wench                           120
    Thou frownst vpon thy Fate that smilles on thee.
    Take heede, take heede, for such dye miserable.
    Goe get thee to thy loue as was decreed:
    Ascend her Chamber Window, hence and comfort her,
    But looke thou stay not till the watch be set:                   125
    For then thou canst not passe to _Mantua_.
    Nurse prouide all things in a readines,
    Comfort thy Mistresse, haste the house to bed,
    Which heauy sorrow makes them apt vnto.

    _Nur_: Good Lord what a thing learning is.                       130
    I could haue stayde heere all this night
    To heare good counsell. Well Sir,
    Ile tell my Lady that you will come.

    _Rom_: Doe so and bidde my sweet prepare to childe,
    Farwell good Nurse.                                              135

              _Nurse offers to goe in and turnes againe._

    _Nur_: Heere is a Ring Sir, that she bad me giue you,

    _Rom_: How well my comfort is reuiud by this.

                             _Exit Nurse._

    _Fr_: Soiorne in _Mantua_, Ile finde out your man,
    And he shall signifie from time to time:
    Euery good hap that doth befall thee heere.                      140
    Farwell.

    _Rom_: But that a ioy, past ioy cryes out on me,
    It were a griefe so breefe to part with thee.


[Sidenote: [SC. XIV.]]

                _Enter olde Capolet and his Wife, with_
                            _County Paris._

    _Cap_: Thinges haue fallen out Sir so vnluckily,
    That we haue had no time to moue my daughter.
    Looke yee Sir, she lou'd her kinsman dearely,
    And so did I. Well, we were borne to dye,
    Wife wher's your daughter, is she in her chamber?                  5
    I thinke she meanes not to come downe to night.

    _Par_: These times of woe affoord no time to wooe,
    Maddam farwell, commend me to your daughter.

                 _Paris offers to goe in, and Capolet_
                          _calles him againe._

    _Cap_: Sir _Paris_? Ile make a desperate tender of my child.
    I thinke she will be rulde in all respectes by mee:               10
    But soft what day is this?

    _Par_: Munday my Lord.

    _Cap_: Oh then Wensday is too soone,
    On Thursday let it be: you shall be maried.
    Wee'le make no great a doe, a frend or two, or so:                15
    For looke ye Sir, _Tybalt_ being slaine so lately,
    It will be thought we held him care leslye:
    If we should reuell much, therefore we will haue
    Some halfe a dozen frends and make no more adoe.
    But what say you to Thursday.                                     20

    _Par_: My Lorde I wishe that Thursday were to morrow.

    _Cap_: Wife goe you to your daughter, ere you goe to bed.
    Acquaint her with the County _Paris_ loue,
    Fare well my Lord till Thursday next.
    Wife gette you to your daughter. Light to my Chamber.             25
    Afore me it is so very very late,
    That we may call it earely by and by.

                                                               _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. XV.]]

                _Enter Romeo and Iuliet at the window._

    _Iul_: Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet nere day,
    It was the Nightingale and not the Larke
    That pierst the fearfull hollow of thine eare:
    Nightly she sings on yon Pomegranate tree,
    Beleeue me loue, it was the Nightingale.                           5

    _Rom_: It was the Larke, the Herald of the Morne,
    And not the Nightingale. See Loue what enuious strakes
    Doo lace the seuering clowdes in yonder East.
    Nights candles are burnt out, and iocond Day
    Stands tiptoes on the mystie mountaine tops.                      10
    I must be gone and liue, or stay and dye.

    _Jul_: Yon light is not day light, I know it I:
    It is some Meteor that the Sunne exhales,
    To be this night to thee a Torch-bearer,
    And light thee on thy way to _Mantua_.                            15
    Then stay awhile, thou shalt not goe soone.

    _Rom_: Let me stay here, let me be tane, and dye:
    If thou wilt haue it so, I am content.
    Ile say yon gray is not the Mornings Eye,
    It is the pale reflex of _Cynthias_ brow.                         20
    Ile say it is the Nightingale that beates
    The vaultic heauen so high aboue our heads,
    And not the Larke the Messenger of Morne.
    Come death and welcome, _Iuliet_ wils it so.
    What sayes my Loue? lets talke, tis not yet day.                  25

    _Jul_: It is, it is, begone, flye hence away.
    It is the Larke that sings so out of tune,
    Straining harsh Discords and vnpleasing Sharpes.
    Some say, the Larke makes sweete Diuision:
    This doth not so: for this diuideth vs.                           30
    Some say the Larke and loathed Toad change eyes,
    I would that now they had changd voyces too:
    Since arme from arme her voyce doth vs affray,
    Hunting thee hence with Huntsvp to the day.
    So now be gone, more light and light it growes.                   35

    _Rom_: More light and light, more darke and darke our woes.
    Farewell my Loue, one kisse and Ile descend.

                           _He goeth downe._

    _Jul_: Art thou gone so, my Lord, my Loue, my Frend?
    I must heare from thee euerie day in the hower:
    For in an hower there are manie minutes,                          40
    Minutes are dayes, so will I number them:
    Oh, by this count I shall be much in yeares,
    Ere I see thee againe.

    _Rom_: Farewell, I will omit no opportunitie
    That may conueigh my greetings loue to thee.

    _Iul_: Oh, thinkst thou we shall euer meete againe.

    _Rom_: No doubt, no doubt, and all this woe shall serue
    For sweete discourses in the time to come.

    _Jul_: Oh God, I have an ill diuining soule.
    Me thinkes I see thee now thou art below                          50
    Like one dead in the bottome of a Tombe:
    Either mine ey-sight failes, or thou lookst pale.

    _Rom_: And trust me Loue, in my eye so doo you,
    Drie sorrow drinkes our blood: adieu, adieu.      _Exit._

                         _Enter Nurse hastely._

    _Nur_: Madame beware, take heed the day is broke,                 55
    Your Mother's comming to your Chamber, make all sure.

                                      _She goeth downe from the window._

                     _Enter Iuliets Mother, Nurse._

    _Moth_: Where are you Daughter?

    _Nur_: What Ladie, Lambe, what _Iuliet_?

    _Iul_: How now, who calls?

    _Nur_: It is your Mother.                                         60

    _Moth_: Why how now _Juliet_?

    _Iul_: Madam, I am not well.

    _Moth_: What euermore weeping for your Cosens death:
    I thinke thoult wash him from his graue with teares.

    _Iul_: I cannot chuse, hauing so great a losse.                   65

    _Moth_: I cannot blame thee.
    But it greeues thee more that Villaine liues.

    _Iul_: What Villaine Madame?

    _Moth_: That Villaine _Romeo_.

    _Iul_: Villaine and he are manie miles a sunder.                  70

    _Moth_: Content thee Girle, if I could finde a man
    I soone would send to _Mantua_ where he is,
    That should bestow on him so sure a draught,
    As he should soone beare _Tybalt_ companie.

    _Iul_: Finde you the meanes, and Ile finde such a man:            75
    For whilest he liues, my heart shall nere be light
    Till I behold him, dead is my poore heart.
    Thus for a Kinsman vext?

    _Moth_: Well let that passe. I come to bring thee ioyfull newes?

    _Iul_: And ioy comes well in such a needfull time.                80

    _Moth_: Well then, thou hast a carefull Father Girle,
    And one who pittying thy needfull state,
    Hath found thee out a happie day of ioy.

    _Iul_: What day is that I pray you?

    _Moth_: Marry my Childe,                                          85
    The gallant, yong and youthfull Gentleman,
    The Countie _Paris_ at Saint _Peters_ Church,
    Early next Thursday morning must prouide,
    To make you there a glad and ioyfull Bride.

    _Iul_: Now by Saint _Peters_ Church and _Peter_ too,              90
    He shall not there make mee a ioyfull Bride.
    Are these the newes you had to tell me of?
    Marrie here are newes indeed. Madame I will not marrie yet.
    And when I doo, it shalbe rather _Romeo_ whom I hate,
    Than Countie _Paris_ that I cannot loue.                          95

                         _Enter olde Capolet._

    _Moth_: Here comes your Father, you may tell him so.

    _Capo_: Why how now, euermore showring?
    In one little bodie thou resemblest a sea, a barke, a storme:
    For this thy bodie which I tearme a barke,
    Still floating in thy euerfalling teares,                        100
    And tost with sighes arising from thy hart:
    Will without succour shipwracke presently.
    But heare you Wife, what haue you sounded her, what saies she to it?

    _Moth_: I haue, but she will none she thankes ye:
    Would God that she were married to her graue.                    105

    _Capo_: What will she not, doth she not thanke vs, doth
    she not wexe proud?

    _Iul_: Not proud ye haue, but thankfull that ye haue:
    Proud can I neuer be of that I hate,
    But thankfull euen for hate that is ment loue.                   110

    _Capo_: Proud and I thanke you, and I thanke you not,
    And yet not proud. Whats here, chop logicke.
    Proud me no prouds, nor thanke me no thankes,
    But fettle your fine ioynts on Thursday next
    To goe with _Paris_ to Saint _Peters_ Church,                    115
    Or I will drag you on a hurdle thether.
    Out you greene sicknes baggage, out you tallow face.

    _Iu_: Good father heare me speake?

                          _She kneeles downe._

    _Cap_: I tell thee what, eyther resolue on thursday next
    To goe with _Paris_ to Saint _Peters_ Church:                    120
    Or henceforth neuer looke me in the face.
    Speake not, reply not, for my fingers ytch.
    Why wife, we thought that we were scarcely blest
    That God had sent vs but this onely chyld:
    But now I see this one is one too much,                          125
    And that we haue a crosse in hauing her.

    _Nur_: Mary God in heauen blesse her my Lord,
    You are too blame to rate her so.

    _Cap._ And why my Lady wisedome? hold your tung,
    Good prudence smatter with your gossips, goe.                    130

    _Nur_: Why my Lord I speake no treason.

    _Cap_: Oh goddegodden.
    Vtter your grauity ouer a gossips boule,
    For heere wee need it not.

    _Mo_: My lord ye are too hotte.                                  135

    _Cap_: Gods blessed mother wife it mads me,
    Day, night, early, late, at home, abroad,
    Alone, in company, waking or sleeping,
    Still my care hath beene to see her matcht.
    And hauing now found out a Gentleman,                            140
    Of Princely parentage, youthfull, and nobly trainde.
    Stuft as they say with honorable parts,
    Proportioned as ones heart coulde wish a man:
    And then to haue a wretched whyning foole,
    A puling mammet in her fortunes tender,                          145
    To say I cannot loue, I am too young, I pray you pardon mee?
    But if you cannot wedde Ile pardon you.
    Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
    Looke to it, thinke out, I doe not vse to iest.
    I tell yee what, Thursday is neere,                              150
    Lay hand on heart, aduise, bethinke your selfe,
    If you be mine, Ile giue you to my frend:
    If not, hang, drowne, starue, beg,
    Dye in the streetes: for by my Soule
    Ile neuer more acknowledge thee,                                 155
    Nor what I haue shall euer doe thee good,
    Thinke ont, looke toot, I doe not vse to iest.        _Exit._

    _Iul_: Is there no pitty hanging in the cloudes,
    That lookes into the bottom of my woes?
    I doe beseech you Madame, cast me not away,                      160
    Defer this mariage for a day or two,
    Or if you cannot, make my mariage bed
    In that dimme monument where _Tybalt_ lyes.

    _Moth_: Nay be assured I will not speake a word.
    Do what thou wilt for I haue done with thee.       _Exit._       165

    _Iul_: Ah Nurse what comfort? what counsell canst thou giue me.

    _Nur_: Now trust me Madame, I know not what to say:
    Your _Romeo_ he is banisht, and all the world to nothing
    He neuer dares returne to challendge you.
    Now I thinke good you marry with this County,
    Oh he is a gallant Gentleman, R_omeo_ is but a dishclout
    In respect of him. I promise you
    I thinke you happy in this second match.
    As for your husband he is dead:
    Or twere as good he were, for you haue no vse of him.            175

    _Iul_: Speakst thou this from thy heart?

    _Nur_: I and from my soule, or els beshrew them both.

    _Iul_: Amen.

    _Nur_: What say you Madame?

    _Iul_: Well, thou hast comforted me wondrous much,               180
    I pray thee goe thy waies vnto my mother
    Tell her I am gone hauing displeasde my Father.
    To Fryer _Laurence_ Cell to confesse me,
    And to be absolu'd.

    _Nur_: I will, and this is wisely done.                          185

                       _She lookes after Nurse._

    _Iul_: Auncient damnation, O most cursed fiend.
    Is it more sinne to wish me thus forsworne,
    Or to dispraise him with the selfe same tongue
    That thou hast praisde him with aboue compare
    So many thousand times? Goe Counsellor,                          190
    Thou and my bosom henceforth shalbe twaine.
    Ile to the Fryer to know his remedy,
    If all faile els, I haue the power to dye.

                                                                 _Exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. XVI.]]

                        _Enter Fryer and Paris._

    _Fr_: On Thursday say ye: the time is very short,

    _Par_: My Father _Capolet_ will haue it so,
    And I am nothing slacke to slow his hast.

    _Fr_: You say you doe not know the Ladies minde?
    Vneuen is the course, I like it not.                               5

    _Par_: Immoderately she weepes for _Tybalts_ death,
    And therefore haue I little talkt of loue.
    For _Venus_ smiles not in a house of teares,
    Now Sir, her father thinkes it daungerous:
    That she doth giue her sorrow so much sway.                       10
    And in his wisedome hasts our mariage,
    To stop the inundation of her teares.
    Which too much minded by her selfe alone
    May be put from her by societie.
    Now doe ye know the reason of this hast.                          15

    _Fr_: I would I knew not why it should be slowd.

                             _Enter Paris._

    Heere comes the lady to my cell,

    _Par_: Welcome my loue, my Lady and my wife:

    _Iu_: That may be sir, when I may be a wife,

    _Par_: That may be, must be loue, on thursday next.               20

    _Iu_: What must be shalbe.

    _Fr_: Thats a certaine text.

    _Par_: What come ye to confession to this Fryer.

    _Iu_: To tell you that were to confesse to you.

    _Par_: Do not deny to him that you loue me.                       25

    _Iul_: I will confesse to you that I loue him,

    _Par_: So I am sure you will that you loue me.

    _Iu_: And if I doe, it wilbe of more price,
    Being spoke behinde your backe, than to your face.

    _Par_: Poore soule that face is much abus'd with teares.          30

    _Iu_: The teares haue got small victory by that,
    For it was bad enough before their spite.

    _Par_: Thou wrongst it more than teares by that report.

    _Iu_: That is no wrong sir, that is a truth:
    And what I spake I spake it to my face.                           35

    _Par_: Thy face is mine and thou hast slaundred it.

    _Iu_: It may be so, for it is not mine owne.
    Are you at leasure holy Father now:
    Or shall I come to you at euening Masse?

    _Fr_: My leasure serues me pensive daughter now.                  40
    My Lord we must entreate the time alone.

    _Par_: God sheild I should disturbe deuotion,
    _Iuliet_ farwell, and keep this holy kisse.

                                                           _Exit Paris._

    _Iu_: Goe shut the doore and when thou hast done so,
    Come weepe with me that am past cure, past help,                  45

    _Fr_: Ah _Iuliet_ I already know thy griefe,
    I heare thou must and nothing may proroge it,
    On Thursday next be married to the Countie.

    _Iul_: Tell me not Frier that thou hearst of it,
    Vnlesse thou tell me how we may preuent it.                       50
    Giue me some sudden counsell: els behold
    Twixt my extreames and me, this bloodie Knife
    Shall play the Vmpeere, arbitrating that
    Which the Commission of thy yeares and arte
    Could to no issue of true honour bring.                           55
    Speake not, be briefe: for I desire to die,
    If what thou speakst, speake not of remedie.

    _Fr_: Stay _Juliet_, I doo spie a kinde of hope,
    Which craues as desperate an execution,
    As that is desperate we would preuent.
    If rather than to marrie Countie _Paris_
    Thou hast the strength or will to slay thy selfe,
    Tis not vnlike that thou wilt vndertake
    A thing like death to chyde away this shame,
    Thou coapst with death it selfe to flye from blame.               65
    And if thou doost, Ile giue thee remedie.

    _Jul_: Oh bid me leape (rather than marrie _Paris_)
    From off the battlements of yonder tower:
    Or chaine me to some steepie mountaines top,
    Where roaring Beares and sauage Lions are:                        70
    Or shut me nightly in a Charnell-house,
    With reekie shankes, and yeolow chaples sculls:
    Or lay me in tombe with one new dead:
    Things that to heare them namde haue made me tremble;
    And I will doo it without feare or doubt,                         75
    To keep my selfe a faithfull vnstaind Wife
    To my deere Lord, my deerest _Romeo_.

    _Fr_: Hold _Iuliet_, hie thee home, get thee to bed,
    Let not thy Nurse lye with thee in thy Chamber:
    And when thou art alone, take thou this Violl,                    80
    And this distilled Liquor drinke thou off:
    When presently through all thy veynes shall run
    A dull and heauie slumber, which shall seaze
    Each vitall spirit: for no Pulse shall keepe
    His naturall progresse, but surcease to beate:                    85
    No signe of breath shall testifie thou liust.
    And in this borrowed likenes of shrunke death,
    Thou shall remaine full two and fortie houres.
    And when thou art laid in thy Kindreds Vault,
    Ile send in hast to _Mantua_ to thy Lord,                         90
    And he shall come and take thee from thy graue.

    _Iul_: Frier I goe, be sure thou send for my deare _Romeo_.

                                                               _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. XVII.]]

               _Enter olde Capolet, his Wife, Nurse, and_
                             _Seruingman._

    _Capo_: Where are you sirra?

    _Ser_: Heere forsooth.

    _Capo_: Goe, prouide me twentie cunning Cookes.

    _Ser_: I warrant you Sir, let me alone for that. Ile knowe
    them by licking their fingers.                                     5

    _Capo_: How canst thou know them so?

    _Ser_: Ah sir, tis an ill Cooke cannot licke his owne fingers.

    _Capo_: Well get you gone.

                           _Exit Seruingman._

    But wheres this Head-strong?

    _Moth_: Shees gone (my Lord) to Frier _Laurence_ Cell
    To be confest.

    _Capo_: Ah, he may hap to doo some good of her,
    A headstrong selfewild harlotrie it is.

                            _Enter_ Iuliet.

    _Moth_: See here she commeth from Confession,                     15

    _Capo_: How now my Head-strong, where haue you bin
    gadding?

    _Iul_: Where I haue learned to repent the sin
    Of froward wilfull opposition
    Gainst you and your behests, and am enioynd                       20
    By holy _Laurence_ to fall prostrate here,
    And craue remission of so foule a fact.

                          _She kneeles downe._

    _Moth_: Why thats well said.

    _Capo_: Now before God this holy reuerent Frier
    All our whole Citie is much bound vnto.                           25
    Goe tell the Countie presently of this,
    For I will haue this knot knit vp to morrow.

    _Jul_: Nurse, will you go with me to my Closet,
    To sort such things as shall be requisite
    Against to morrrow,                                               30

    _Moth_: I pree thee doo, good Nurse goe in with her,
    Helpe her to sort Tyres, Rebatoes, Chaines,
    And I will come vnto you presently,

    _Nur_: Come sweet hart, shall we goe:

    _Iul_: I pree thee let vs.                                        35

                       _Exeunt Nurse and Iuliet._

    _Moth_: Me thinks on Thursday would be time enough.

    _Capo_: I say I will haue this dispatcht to morrow,
    Goe one and certefie the Count thereof.

    _Moth_: I pray my Lord, let it be Thursday.

    _Capo_: I say to morrow while shees in the mood.                  40

    _Moth_: We shall be short in our prouision.

    _Capo_: Let me alone for that, goe get you in,
    Now before God my heart is passing light,
    To see her thus conformed to our will.        _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. XVIII.]]

                         _Enter Nurse, Iuliet._

    _Nur_: Come, come, what need you anie thing else?

    _Iul_: Nothing good Nurse, but leaue me to my selfe:
    For I doo meane to lye alone to night.

    _Nur_: Well theres a cleane smocke vnder your pillow,
    and so good night.             _Exit._

                            _Enter Mother._

    _Moth_: What are you busie, doo you need my helpe?

    _Iul_: No Madame, I desire to lye alone,
    For I haue manie things to thinke vpon.

    _Moth_: Well then good night, be stirring _Iuliet_,
    The Countie will be earlie here to morrow.          _Exit._       10

    _Iul_: Farewell, God knowes when wee shall meete againe.
    Ah, I doo take a fearfull thing in hand.
    What if this Potion should not worke at all.
    Must I of force be married to the Countie?
    This shall forbid it. Knife, lye thou there.                      15
    What if the Frier should giue me this drinke
    To poyson mee, for feare I should disclose
    Our former marriage? Ah, I wrong him much,
    He is a holy and religious Man:
    I will not entertaine so bad a thought.                           20
    What if I should be stifled in the Toomb?
    Awake an houre before the appointed time:
    Ah then I feare I shall be lunaticke,
    And playing with my dead forefathers bones,
    Dash out my franticke braines. Me thinkes I see                   25
    My Cosin _Tybalt_ weltring in his bloud,
    Seeking for _Romeo_: stay _Tybalt_ stay.
    _Romeo_ I come, this doe I drinke to thee.

                           _She fals vpon her bed within the Curtaines._


[Sidenote: [SC. XIX.]]

                   _Enter Nurse with hearbs, Mother._

    _Moth_: Thats well said Nurse, set all in redines,
    The Countie will be heere immediatly.

                            _Enter Oldeman._

    _Cap_: Make hast, make hast, for it is almost day,
    The Curfewe bell hath rung, t'is foure a clocke,
    Looke to your bakt meates good _Angelica_.

    _Nur_: Goe get you to bed you cotqueane. I faith you
    will be sicke anone.

    _Cap_: I warrant thee Nurse I haue ere now watcht all
    night, and haue taken no harme at all.

    _Moth_: I you haue beene a mouse hunt in your time.               10

                 _Enter Seruingman with Logs & Coales._

    _Cap_: A Ielous hood, a Ielous hood: How now sirra?
    What haue you there?

    _Ser_: Forsooth Logs.

    _Cap_: Goe, goe choose dryer. Will will tell thee where
    thou shalt fetch them.                                            15

    _Ser_: Nay I warrant let me alone, I haue a heade I troe to
    choose a Log.

                                _Exit._

    _Cap_: Well goe thy way, thou shalt be logger head.
    Come, come, make hast call vp your daughter,
    The Countie will be heere with musicke straight.                  20
    Gods me hees come, Nurse call vp my daughter.

    _Nur_: Goe, get you gone. What lambe, what Lady
    birde? fast I warrant. What _Iuliet_? well, let the County take
    you in your bed: yee sleepe for a weeke now, but the next
    night, the Countie _Paris_ hath set vp his rest that you shal rest  25
    but little. What lambe I say, fast still: what Lady, Loue,
    whatbride, what _Iuliet_? Gods me how sound she sleeps? Nay
    then I see I must wake you indeed. Whats heere, laide on
    your bed, drest in your cloathes and down, ah me, alack the
    day, some Aqua vitÃ¦ hoe.                                          30

                            _Enter Mother._

    _Moth_: How now whats the matter?

    _Nur_: Alack the day, shees dead, shees dead, shees dead.

    _Moth_: Accurst, vnhappy, miserable time.

                            _Enter Oldeman._

    _Cap_: Come, come, make hast, wheres my daughter?

    _Moth_: Ah shees dead, shees dead.                                35

    _Cap_: Stay, let me see, all pale and wan.
    Accursed time, vnfortunate olde man.

                        _Enter Fryer and Paris._

    _Par_: What is the bride ready to goe to Church?

    _Cap_: Ready to goe, but neuer to returne.
    O Sonne the night before thy wedding day,                         40
    Hath Death laine with thy bride, flower as she is,
    Deflowerd by him, see, where she lyes,
    Death is my Sonne in Law, to him I giue all that I haue,

    _Par_: Haue I thought long to see this mornings face,
    And doth it now present such prodegies?                           45
    Accurst, vnhappy, miserable man,
    Forlorne, forsaken, destitute I am:
    Borne to the world to be a slaue in it.
    Distrest, remediles, and vnfortunate.
    O heauens, O nature, wherefore did you make me,                   50
    To liue so vile, so wretched as I shall.

    _Cap_: O heere she lies that was our hope, our ioy,
    And being dead, dead sorrow nips vs all.

              _All at once cry out and wring their hands._

    _All cry_: And all our ioy, and all our hope is dead,
    Dead, lost, vndone, absented, wholy fled.                         55

    _Cap_: Cruel, vniust, impartiall destinies,
    Why to this day haue you preseru'd my life?
    To see my hope, my stay, my ioy, my life,
    Depriude of sence, of life, of all by death,
    Cruell, vniust, impartiall destinies.                             60

    _Cap_: O sad fac'd sorrow map of misery,
    Why this sad time haue I desird to see.
    This day, this vniust, this impartiall day
    Wherein I hop'd to see my comfort full,
    To be depriude by suddaine destinie.                              65

    _Moth_: O woe, alacke, distrest, why should I liue?
    To see this day, this miserable day.
    Alacke the time that euer I was borne.
    To be partaker of this destinie.
    Alacke the day, alacke and welladay.                              70

    _Fr_: O peace for shame, if not for charity.
    Your daughter liues in peace and happines,
    And it is vaine to wish it otherwise.
    Come sticke your Rosemary in this dead coarse,
    And as the custome of our Country is,                             75
    In all her best and sumptuous ornaments,
    Conuay her where her Ancestors lie tomb'd,

    _Cap_: Let it be so, come wofull sorrow mates,
    Let vs together taste this bitter fate.

                _They all but the Nurse goe foorth, casting Rosemary on_
                                         _her and shutting the Curtens._

                           _Enter Musitions._

    _Nur_: Put vp, put vp, this is a wofull case.      _Exit._        80

    _1._ I by my troth Mistresse is it, it had need be mended.

                          _Enter Seruingman._

    _Ser_: Alack alack what shal I doe, come Fidlers play me
    some mery dumpe.

    _1._ A sir, this is no time to play.

    _Ser_: You will not then?                                         85

    _1._ No marry will wee.

    _Ser_: Then will I giue it you, and soundly to.

    _1._ What will you giue vs?

    _Ser_: The fidler, Ile re you, Ile fa you, Ile sol you.

    _1._ If you re vs and fa vs, we will note you.                    90

    _Ser_: I will put vp my Iron dagger, and beate you with
    my wodden wit. Come on Simon found Pot, Ile pose you,

    _1._ Lets heare.

    _Ser_: When griping griefe the heart doth wound,
    And dolefull dumps the minde oppresse:                            95
    Then musique with her siluer sound,
    Why siluer sound? Why siluer sound?

    _1._ I thinke because musicke hath a sweet sound.

    _Ser_: Pretie, what say you Mathew minikine?

    _2._ I thinke because Musitions sound for siluer.                100

    _Ser_: Prettie too: come, what say you?

    _3._ I say nothing.

    _Ser_: I thinke so, Ile speake for you because you are the
    Singer. I saye Siluer sound, because such Fellowes as you
    haue sildome Golde for sounding. Farewell Fidlers,               105
    farewell.      _Exit._

    _1._ Farewell and be hangd: come lets goe.           _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. XX.]]

                             _Enter Romeo._

    _Rom_: If I may trust the flattering Eye of Sleepe,
    My Dreame presagde some good euent to come.
    My bosome Lord sits chearfull in his throne,
    And I am comforted with pleasing dreames.
    Me thought I was this night alreadie dead:                         5
    (Strange dreames that giue a dead man leaue to thinke)
    And that my Ladie _Iuliet_ came to me,
    And breathd such life with kisses in my lips,
    That I reuiude and was an Emperour.

                   _Enter Balthasar his man booted._

    Newes from _Verona_. How now _Balthasar_,                         10
    How doth my Ladie? Is my Father well?
    How fares my _Juliet_? that I aske againe:
    If she be well, then nothing can be ill.

    _Balt_: Then nothing can be ill, for she is well,
    Her bodie sleepes in _Capels_ Monument,                           15
    And her immortall parts with Angels dwell.
    Pardon me Sir, that am the Messenger of such bad tidings.

    _Rom_: Is it euen so? then I defie my Starres.
    Goe get me incke and paper, hyre post horse,
    I will not stay in _Mantua_ to night.                             20

    _Balt_: Pardon me Sir, I will not leaue you thus,
    Your lookes are dangerous and full of feare:
    I dare not, nor I will not leaue you yet.

    _Rom_: Doo as I bid thee, get me incke and paper,
    And hyre those horse: stay not I say.                             25

                           _Exit Balthasar._

    Well _Iuliet_, I will lye with thee to night.
    Lets see for meanes. As I doo remember
    Here dwells a Pothecarie whom oft I noted
    As I past by, whose needie shop is stufft
    With beggerly accounts of emptie boxes:                           30
    And in the same an _Aligarta_ hangs,
    Olde endes of packthred, and cakes of Roses,
    Are thinly strewed to make vp a show.
    Him as I noted, thus with my selfe I thought:
    And if a man should need a poyson now,                            35
    (Whose present sale is death in _Mantua_)
    Here he might buy it. This thought of mine
    Did but forerunne my need: and here about he dwels.
    Being Holiday the Beggers shop is shut.
    What ho Apothecarie, come forth I say.                            40

                          _Enter Apothecarie._

    _Apo_: Who calls, what would you sir?

    _Rom_: Heeres twentie duckates,
    Giue me a dram of some such speeding geere,
    As will dispatch the wearie takers life,
    As suddenly as powder being fierd                                 45
    From forth a Cannons mouth.

    _Apo_: Such drugs I haue I must of force confesse,
    But yet the law is death to those that sell them.

    _Rom_: Art thou so bare and full of pouertie,
    And doost thou feare to violate the Law?                          50
    The Law is not thy frend, nor the Lawes frend,
    And therefore make no conscience of the law:
    Vpon thy backe hangs ragged Miserie,
    And starued Famine dwelleth in thy cheekes.

    _Apo_: My pouertie but not my will consents.                      55

    _Rom_: I pay thy pouertie, but not thy will.

    _Apo_: Hold take you this, and put it in anie liquid thing
    you will, and it will serue had you the liues of twenty men.

    _Rom_: Hold, take this gold, worse poyson to mens soules
    Than this which thou hast giuen me. Goe hye thee hence,           60
    Goe buy the cloathes, and get thee into flesh.
    Come cordiall and not poyson, goe with mee
    To _Iuliets_ Graue: for there mvst I vse thee.         _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. XXI.]]

                          _Enter Frier Iohn._

    _John_: What Frier _Laurence_, Brother, ho?

    _Laur_: This same should be the voyce of Frier _Iohn_.
    What newes from _Mantua_, what will _Romeo_ come?

    _Iohn_: Going to seeke a barefoote Brother out,
    One of our order to associate mee,                                 5
    Here in this Cittie visiting the sick,
    Whereas the infectious pestilence remaind:
    And being by the Searchers of the Towne
    Found and examinde, we were both shut vp.

    _Laur_: Who bare my letters then to _Romeo_?                      10

    _Iohn_: I haue them still, and here they are.

    _Laur_: Now by my holy Order,
    The letters were not nice, but of great weight.
    Goe get thee hence, and get me presently
    A spade and mattocke.                                             15

    _Iohn_: Well I will presently go fetch thee them.           _Exit._

    _Laur_: Now must I to the Monument alone,
    Least that the Ladie should before I come
    Be wakde from sleepe. I will hye
    To free her from that Tombe of miserie.      _Exit._              20


[Sidenote: [SC. XXII.]]

            _Enter Countie Paris and his Page with flowers_
                          _and sweete water._

    _Par_: Put out the torch, and lye thee all along
    Vnder this Ew-tree, keeping thine eare close to the hollow ground.
    And if thou heare one tread within this Churchyard,
    Staight giue me notice.                                            5

    _Boy_: I will my Lord.

                 _Paris strewes the Tomb with flowers._

    _Par_: Sweete Flower, with flowers I strew thy Bridale bed:
    Sweete Tombe that in thy circuite dost containe,
    The perfect modell of eternitie:
    Faire _Iuliet_ that with Angells dost remaine,                    10
    Accept this latest fauour at my hands,
    That liuing honourd thee, and being dead
    With funerall praises doo adorne thy Tombe.

    _Boy whistles and calls._ My Lord.

              _Enter Romeo and Balthasar, with a torch, a_
                    _mattocke, and a crow of yron._

    _Par_: The boy giues warning, something doth approach.            15
    What cursed foote wanders this was to night,
    To stay my obsequies and true loues rites?
    What with a torch, muffle me night a while.

    _Rom_: Giue mee this mattocke, and this wrentching Iron.
    And take these letters, early in the morning,                     20
    See thou deliuer them to my Lord and Father.
    So get thee gone and trouble me no more.
    Why I descend into this bed of death,
    Is partly to behold my Ladies face,
    But chiefly to take from her dead finger,                         25
    A precious ring which I must vse
    In deare imployment: but if thou wilt stay,
    Further to prie in what I vndertake,
    By heauen Ile teare thee ioynt by ioynt,
    And strewe thys hungry churchyard with thy lims                   30
    The time and my intents are sauage, wilde.

    _Balt_: Well, Ile be gone and not trouble you.

    _Rom_: So shalt thou win my fauour, take thou this,
    Commend me to my Father, farwell good fellow.

    _Balt_: Yet for all this will I not part from hence.              35

                        _Romeo opens the tombe._

    _Rom_: Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
    Gorde with the dearest morsell of the earth.
    Thus I enforce thy rotten iawes to ope.

    _Par_: This is that banisht haughtie _Mountague_,
    That murderd my loues cosen, I will apprehend him.                40
    Stop thy vnhallowed toyle vile _Mountague_.
    Can vengeance be pursued further then death?
    I doe attach thee as a fellon heere.
    The Law condemnes thee, therefore thou must dye,

    _Rom_: I must indeed, and therefore came I hither,                45
    Good youth be gone, tempt not a desperate man.
    Heape not another sinne vpon my head
    By sheding of thy bloud, I doe protest
    I loue thee better then I loue my selfe:
    For I come hyther armde against my selfe,                         50

    _Par_: I doe defie thy coniurations:
    And doe attach thee as a fellon heere.

    _Rom_: What dost thou tempt me, then haue at thee boy.

                             _They fight._

    _Boy_: O Lord they fight, I will goe call the watch.

    _Par_: Ah I am slaine, if thou be mercifull                       55
    Open the tombe, lay me with _Iuliet_.

    _Rom_: Yfaith I will, let me peruse this face,
    _Mercutios_ kinsman, noble County _Paris_?
    What said my man, when my betossed soule
    Did not regard him as we past a long.
    Did he not say _Paris_ should have maried
    _Iuliet_? eyther he said so, or I dreamd it so.
    But I will satisfie thy last request,
    For thou hast prizd thy loue aboue thy life.
    Death lye thou there, by a dead man interd,                       65
    How oft have many at the houre of death
    Beene blith and pleasant? which their keepers call
    A lightning before death But how may I
    Call this a lightning. Ah deare _Iuliet_,
    How well thy beauty doth become this graue?                       70
    O I beleeue that vnsubstanciall death,
    Is amorous, and doth court my loue.
    Therefore will I, O heere, O euer heere,
    Set vp my euerlasting rest
    With wormes, that are thy chamber mayds.                          75
    Come desperate Pilot now at once runne on
    The dashing rockes thy sea-sicke weary barge.
    Heers to my loue. O true Apothecary:
    Thy drugs are swift: thus with a kisse I dye.      _Falls._

                    _Enter Fryer with a Lanthorne._

    How oft to night haue these my aged feete                         80
    Stumbled at graues as I did passe along.
    Whose there?

    _Man._ A frend and one that knowes you well.

    _Fr_: Who is it that consorts so late the dead,
    What light is yon? if I be not deceiued,                          85
    Me thinkes it burnes in _Capels_ monument?

    _Man._ It doth so holy Sir, and there is one
    That loues you dearly.

    _Fr._ Who is it?

    _Man: Romeo._                                                     90

    _Fr_: How long hath he beene there?

    _Man_: Full halfe an houre and more.

    _Fr_: Goe with me thether.

    _Man_: I dare not sir, he knowes not I am heere:
    On paine of death he chargde me to be gone,                       95
    And not for to disturbe him in his enterprize.

    _Fr_: Then must I goe: my minde presageth ill.

          _Fryer stoops and lookes on the blood and weapons._

    What bloud is this that staines the entrance
    Of this marble stony monument?
    What meanes these maisterles and goory weapons?
    Ah me I doubt, whose heere? what _Romeo_ dead?
    Who and _Paris_ too? what vnluckie houre
    Is accessary to so foule a sinne?

                            _Iuliet rises._

    The Lady sturres.[1595]
    Ah comfortable Fryer.                                            105
    I doe remember well where I should be,
    And what we talkt of: but yet I cannot see
    Him for whose sake I vndertooke this hazard.

    _Fr_: Lady come foorth, I heare some noise at hand,
    We shall be taken, _Paris_ he is slaine,                         110
    And _Romeo_ dead: and if we heere be tane
    We shall be thought to be as accessarie.
    I will prouide for you in some close Nunery.

    _Iul_: Ah leaue me, leaue me, I will not from hence.

    _Fr_: I heare some noise, I dare not stay, come, come.           115

    _Iul_: Goe get thee gone.
    Whats heere a cup closde in my louers hands?
    Ah churle drinke all, and leaue no drop for me.

                             _Enter watch._

    _Watch_: This way, this way.

    _Iul_: I, noise? then must I be resolute.                        120
    O happy dagger thou shalt end my feare,
    Rest in my bosome, thus I come to thee.

                    _She stabs herselfe and falles._

                             _Enter watch._

    _Cap_: Come looke about, what weapons haue we heere?
    See frends where _Iuliet_ two daies buried,
    New bleeding wounded, search and see who's neare,                125
    Attach and bring them to vs presently.

                      _Enter one with the Fryer._

    _1._ Captaine heers a Fryer with tooles about him,
    Fitte to ope a tombe.

    _Cap_: A great suspition, keep him safe.

                      _Enter one with Romeos man._

    _1._ Heeres _Romeos_ Man.                                        130

    _Capt_: Keepe him to be examinde.

                      _Enter Prince with others._

    _Prin_: What early mischiefe calls vs vp so soone.

    _Capt_: O noble Prince, see here
    Where _Juliet_ that hath lyen intoombd two dayes,
    Warme and fresh bleeding, _Romeo_ and Countie _Paris_            135
    Likewise newly slaine.

    _Prin_: Search seeke about to finde the murderers.

                   _Enter olde Capolet and his Wife._

    _Capo_: What rumor's this that is so early vp?

    _Moth_: The people in the streetes crie _Romeo_,
    And some on _Iuliet_: as if they alone                           140
    Had been the cause of such a mutinie.

    _Capo_: See Wife, this dagger hath mistooke:
    For (loe) the backe is emptie of yong _Mountague_,
    And it is sheathed in our Daughters breast.

                         _Enter olde Montague._

    _Prin_: Come _Mountague_, for thou art early vp,                 145
    To see thy Sonne and Heire more early downe.

    _Mount_: Dread Souereigne, my Wife is dead to night,
    And yong _Benuolio_ is deceased too:
    What further mischiefe can there yet be found?

    _Prin_: First come and see, then speake.                         150

    _Mount_: O thou vntaught, what manners is in this
    To presse before thy Father to a graue.

    _Prin_: Come seale your mouthes of outrage for a while,
    And let vs seeke to finde the Authors out
    Of such a hainous and seld seene mischaunce.                     155
    Bring forth the parties in suspition.

    _Fr_: I am the greatest able to doo least.
    Most worthie Prince, heare me but speake the truth.
    And Ile informe you how these things fell out.
    _Juliet_ here slaine was married to that _Romeo_,                160
    Without her Fathers or her Mothers grant:
    The Nurse was priuie to the marriage.
    The balefull day of this vnhappie marriage,
    Was _Tybalts_ doomesday: for which _Romeo_
    Was banished from hence to _Mantua_.                             165
    He gone, her Father sought by foule constraint
    To marrie her to _Paris_: But her Soule
    (Loathing a second Contract) did refuse
    To giue consent; and therefore did she vrge me
    Either to finde a meanes she might auoyd                         170
    What so her Father sought to force her too:
    Or els all desperately she threatned
    Euen in my presence to dispatch her selfe.
    Then did I giue her, (tutord by mine arte)
    A potion that should make her seeme as dead:                     175
    And told her that I would with all post speed
    Send hence to _Mantua_ for her _Romeo_,
    That he might come and take her from the Toombe.
    But he that had my Letters (Frier _John_)
    Seeking a Brother to associate him,                              180
    Whereas the sicke infection remaind,
    Was stayed by the Searchers of the Towne,
    But _Romeo_ vnderstanding by his man,
    That _Iuliet_ was deceasde, returnde in post
    Vnto _Verona_ for to see his loue.                               185
    What after happened touching _Paris_ death,
    Or _Romeos_ is to me vnknowne at all.
    But when I came to take the Lady hence,
    I found them dead, and she awakt from sleep:
    Whom faine I would haue taken from the tombe,                    190
    Which she refused seeing R_omeo_ dead.
    Anone I heard the watch and then I fled,
    What after happened I am ignorant of.
    And if in this ought haue miscaried.
    By me, or by my meanes let my old life                           195
    Be sacrificd some houre before his time.
    To the most strickest rigor of the Law.

    _Pry_: We still haue knowne thee for a holy man,
    Wheres _Romeos_ man, what can he say in this?

    _Balth_: I brought my maister word that shee was dead,           200
    And then he poasted straight from _Mantua_,
    Vnto this Toombe. These Letters he deliuered me,
    Charging me early giue them to his Father.

    _Prin_: Lets see the Letters, I will read them ouer.
    Where is the Counties Boy that calld the Watch?                  205

    _Boy_: I brought my Master vnto _Juliets_ graue,
    But one approaching, straight I calld my Master.
    At last they fought, I ran to call the Watch.
    And this is all that I can say or know.

    _Prin_: These letters doe make good the Fryers wordes,           210
    Come _Capolet_, and come olde _Mountagewe_.
    Where are these enemies? see what hate hath done.

    _Cap_: Come brother _Mountague_ giue me thy hand,
    There is my daughters dowry: for now no more
    Can I bestowe on her, thats all I haue.                          215

    _Moun_: But I will giue them more, I will erect
    Her statue of pure golde:
    That while _Verona_ by that name is knowne.
    There shall no statue of such price be set,
    As that of _Romeos_ loued _Iuliet_.                              220

    _Cap_: As rich shall _Romeo_ by his Lady lie.
    Poore Sacrifices to our Enmitie.

    _Prin_: A gloomie peace this day doth with it bring.
    Come, let vs hence,
    To haue more talke of these sad things.                          225
    Some shall be pardoned and some punished:
    For nere was heard a Storie of more woe,
    Than this of _Iuliet_ and her _Romeo_.

                                _FINIS._

FOOTNOTES:

[1594] _Watch_: is omitted in the text but '_Watch_: Vp' is the
catchword of the previous page.

[1595] Here again the stage direction is omitted, but '_Iul_:' is the
catchword of the previous page.




TIMON OF ATHENS.




DRAMATIS PERSONÃ[1596].


  TIMON, a noble Athenian.
  LUCIUS,      }
  LUCULLUS,    }  flattering lords.
  SEMPRONIUS,  }
  VENTIDIUS, one of Timon's false friends.
  ALCIBIADES, an Athenian captain.
  APEMANTUS, a churlish philosopher.
  FLAVIUS, steward to Timon.
  Poet, Painter, Jeweller, and Merchant.
  An old Athenian.
  FLAMINIUS,  }
  LUCILIUS,   }  servants to Timon.
  SERVILIUS,  }
  CAPHIS,       }
  PHILOTUS,     }  servants to Timon's creditors and to the
  TITUS,        }                Lords.
  HORTENSIUS,   }
  And others,   }
  A Page. A Fool. Three Strangers.

  PHRYNIA,   }  mistresses to Alcibiades.
  TIMANDRA,  }

                    Cupid and Amazons in the mask.

      Other Lords, Senators, Officers, Banditti, and Attendants.

              SCENE: _Athens, and the neighbouring woods_.

                              THE LIFE OF

                            TIMON OF ATHENS.

FOOTNOTES:

[1596] DRAMATIS PERSONÃ.] THE ACTORS NAMES, at the end of the Play in
F1 F2 F3, prefixed to the Play in F4. See note (I).




ACT I.


SCENE I. _Athens. A hall in Timon's house._[1597]

_Enter_ Poet, Painter, Jeweller, Merchant, _and others, at several
        doors_.[1598]

    _Poet._ Good day, sir.[1599][1600]

    _Pain._                I am glad you're well.[1599]

    _Poet._ I have not seen you long: how goes the world?[1601]

    _Pain._ It wears, sir, as it grows.

    _Poet._                             Ay, that's well known:
    But what particular rarity? what strange,[1602]
    Which manifold record not matches? See,[1603][1604]                5
    Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power[1604]
    Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.[1605]

    _Pain._ I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.

    _Mer._ O, 'tis a worthy lord!

    _Jew._                        Nay, that's most fix'd.

    _Mer._ A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,[1606]       10
    To an untirable and continuate goodness:[1607]
    He passes.[1607][1608]

    _Jew._ I have a jewel here--[1609]

    _Mer._ O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?[1610]

    _Jew._ If he will touch the estimate: but, for that--             15

    _Poet._ [_Reciting to himself_] 'When we for recompense have
        praised the vile,[1611]
    It stains the glory in that happy verse
    Which aptly sings the good.'

    _Mer._ [_Looking on the jewel_] 'Tis a good form.[1612]

    _Jew._ And rich: here is a water, look ye.[1613]                  20

    _Pain._ You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication[1614][1615]
    To the great lord.[1614][1616]

    _Poet._            A thing slipp'd idly from me.
    Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes[1617]
    From whence 'tis nourish'd: the fire i' the flint
    Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame[1618]               25
    Provokes itself, and, like the current, flies[1619]
    Each bound it chafes. What have you there?[1619][1620][1621]

    _Pain._ A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?[1621][1622]

    _Poet._ Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.[1621]
    Let's see your piece.[1621]                                       30

    _Pain._ 'Tis a good piece.[1621][1623]

    _Poet._ So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.[1624]

    _Pain._ Indifferent.

    _Poet._              Admirable: how this grace[1625]
    Speaks his own standing! what a mental power[1625]
    This eye shoots forth! how big imagination                        35
    Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture
    One might interpret.

    _Pain._ It is a pretty mocking of the life.
    Here is a touch; is't good?

    _Poet._                     I will say of it,[1626]
    It tutors nature: artificial strife                               40
    Lives in these touches, livelier than life.[1627]

               _Enter certain_ Senators, _and pass over_.

    _Pain._ How this lord is follow'd![1628]

    _Poet._ The senators of Athens: happy man![1629]

    _Pain._ Look, moe![1630]

    _Poet._ You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.    45
    I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,
    Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug[1631]
    With amplest entertainment: my free drift
    Halts not particularly, but moves itself[1632]
    In a wide sea of wax: no levell'd malice[1633]                    50
    Infects one comma in the course I hold;[1634]
    But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,[1635]
    Leaving no tract behind.[1636]

    _Pain._ How shall I understand you?

    _Poet._                              I will unbolt to you.[1637]
    You see how all conditions, how all minds,                        55
    As well of glib and slippery creatures as[1638]
    Of grave and austere quality, tender down
    Their services to Lord Timon: his large fortune,[1639]
    Upon his good and gracious nature hanging,
    Subdues and properties to his love and tendance                   60
    All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
    To Apemantus, that few things loves better
    Than to abhor himself: even he drops down[1640]
    The knee before him, and returns in peace
    Most rich in Timon's nod.

    _Pain._                   I saw them speak together.[1641]        65

    _Poet._ Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill[1642]
    Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount[1643]
    Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures,
    That labour on the bosom of this sphere
    To propagate their states: amongst them all,                      70
    Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd,
    One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,[1644]
    Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;
    Whose present grace to present slaves and servants[1645]
    Translates his rivals.

    _Pain._                'Tis conceived to scope.[1646]             75
    This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
    With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
    Bowing his head against the steepy mount
    To climb his happiness, would be well express'd
    In our condition.

    _Poet._           Nay, sir, but hear me on.[1647]                 80
    All those which were his fellows but of late,
    Some better than his value, on the moment[1648]
    Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,[1649]
    Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,[1650]
    Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him                     85
    Drink the free air.

    _Pain._             Ay, marry, what of these?

    _Poet._ When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
    Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants
    Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top[1651]
    Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,[1652]           90
    Not one accompanying his declining foot.

    _Pain._ 'Tis common:
    A thousand moral paintings I can show,[1653]
    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's[1654]
    More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well                       95
    To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen[1655]
    The foot above the head.

 _Trumpets sound. Enter_ LORD TIMON, _addressing himself courteously_
    _to every suitor; a_ Messenger _from_ VENTIDIUS _talking with_
         _him_; LUCILIUS _and other servants following_.[1656]

    _Tim._                   Imprison'd is he, say you?

    _Mess._ Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt;[1657]
    His means most short, his creditors most strait:
    Your honourable letter he desires                                100
    To those have shut him up; which failing,[1658]
    Periods his comfort.

    _Tim._               Noble Ventidius! Well,[1659]
    I am not of that feather to shake off
    My friend when he must need me. I do know him[1660]
    A gentleman that well deserves a help:                           105
    Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt and free him.

    _Mess._ Your lordship ever binds him.[1657][1661]

    _Tim._ Commend me to him: I will send his ransom;
    And, being enfranchised, bid him come to me:
    'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,                           110
    But to support him after. Fare you well.

    _Mess._ All happiness to your honour![1657][1662]      [_Exit._

                        _Enter an old_ Athenian.

    _Old Ath._ Lord Timon, hear me speak.

    _Tim._                                 Freely, good father.

    _Old Ath._ Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.

    _Tim._ I have so: what of him?                                   115

    _Old Ath._ Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.[1663]

    _Tim._ Attends he here, or no? Lucilius![1664]

    _Luc._ Here, at your lordship's service.[1665]

    _Old Ath._ This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,[1666]
    By night frequents my house. I am a man                          120
    That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
    And my estate deserves an heir more raised
    Than one which holds a trencher.

    _Tim._                           Well, what further?

    _Old Ath._ One only daughter have I, no kin else,
    On whom I may confer what I have got:                            125
    The maid is fair, o' the youngest for a bride,[1667]
    And I have bred her at my dearest cost
    In qualities of the best. This man of thine
    Attempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,[1668]
    Join with me to forbid him her resort;                           130
    Myself have spoke in vain.

    _Tim._                     The man is honest.[1669]

    _Old Ath._ Therefore he will be, Timon:[1669][1670]
    His honesty rewards him in itself;[1669]
    It must not bear my daughter.

    _Tim._                        Does she love him?

    _Old Ath._ She is young and apt:[1671]                           135
    Our own precedent passions do instruct us
    What levity's in youth.[1672]

    _Tim._ [_To Lucilius_] Love you the maid?[1673]

    _Luc._ Ay, my good lord; and she accepts of it.

    _Old Ath._ If in her marriage my consent be missing,
    I call the gods to witness, I will choose[1674]                  140
    Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,
    And dispossess her all.[1675]

    _Tim._                  How shall she be endow'd,
    If she be mated with an equal husband?[1676]

    _Old Ath._ Three talents on the present; in future, all.

    _Tim._ This gentleman of mine hath served me long:[1677]         145
    To build his fortune I will strain a little,
    For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter:
    What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
    And make him weigh with her.

    _Old Ath._                   Most noble lord,
    Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.                         150

    _Tim._ My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.[1678]

    _Luc._ Humbly I thank your lordship: never may
    That state or fortune fall into my keeping,
    Which is not owed to you![1679]

                              [_Exeunt Lucilius and Old Athenian._[1680]

    _Poet._ Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship![1681]  155

    _Tim._ I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:
    Go not away. What have you there, my friend?

    _Pain._ A piece of painting, which I do beseech
    Your lordship to accept.[1682]

    _Tim._                   Painting is welcome.
    The painting is almost the natural man;[1683]                    160
    For since dishonour traffics with man's nature,
    He is but outside: these pencill'd figures are[1684]
    Even such as they give out. I like your work,
    And you shall find I like it: wait attendance
    Till you hear further from me.

    _Pain._                        The gods preserve ye![1685]       165

    _Tim._ Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;[1686]
    We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewel
    Hath suffer'd under praise.

    _Jew._                      What, my lord! dispraise?[1687]

    _Tim._ A mere satiety of commendations.[1688]
    If I should pay you for 't as 'tis extoll'd,                     170
    It would unclew me quite.[1689]

    _Jew._                    My lord, 'tis rated
    As those which sell would give: but you well know,
    Things of like value, differing in the owners,
    Are prized by their masters: believe 't, dear lord,[1690]
    You mend the jewel by the wearing it.[1691]                      175

    _Tim._ Well mock'd.

    _Mer._ No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,
    Which all men speak with him.

    _Tim._ Look, who comes here: will you be chid?[1692]

                        _Enter_ APEMANTUS.[1693]

    _Jew._ We'll bear, with your lordship.

    _Mer._                                 He'll spare none.[1694]   180

    _Tim._ Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus![1695]

    _Apem._ Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;[1696]
    When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.[1697]

    _Tim._ Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.

    _Apem._ Are they not Athenians?[1698]                            185

    _Tim._ Yes.

    _Apem._ Then I repent not.

    _Jew._ You know me, Apemantus?[1699]

    _Apem._ Thou know'st I do; I call'd thee by thy name.

    _Tim._ Thou art proud, Apemantus.[1700]                          190

    _Apem._ Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.[1701]

    _Tim._ Whither art going?[1702]

    _Apem._ To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.

    _Tim._ That's a deed thou'lt die for.[1703]

    _Apem._ Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.             195

    _Tim._ How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?[1704]

    _Apem._ The best, for the innocence.[1705]

    _Tim._ Wrought he not well that painted it?[1706]

    _Apem._ He wrought better that made the painter; and
    yet he's but a filthy piece of work.                             200

    _Pain._ You're a dog.[1707]

    _Apem._ Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if[1708]
    I be a dog?

    _Tim._ Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?

    _Apem._ No; I eat not lords.                                     205

    _Tim._ An thou shouldst, thou'ldst anger ladies.[1709]

    _Apem._ O, they eat lords; so they come by great[1710]
    bellies.[1710]

    _Tim._ That's a lascivious apprehension.

    _Apem._ So thou apprehend'st it: take it for thy labour.[1711]   210

    _Tim._ How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?

    _Apem._ Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost[1712]
    a man a doit.

    _Tim._ What dost thou think 'tis worth?

    _Apem._ Not worth my thinking. How now, poet![1713]              215

    _Poet._ How now, philosopher!

    _Apem._ Thou liest.

    _Poet._ Art not one?[1714]

    _Apem._ Yes.

    _Poet._ Then I lie not.                                          220

    _Apem._ Art not a poet?

    _Poet._ Yes.

    _Apem._ Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where
    thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.[1715]

    _Poet._ That's not feigned; he is so.                            225

    _Apem._ Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for[1716]
    thy labour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o' the
    flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!

    _Tim._ What wouldst do then, Apemantus?

    _Apem._ E'en as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with             230
    my heart.

    _Tim._ What, thyself?

    _Apem._ Ay.

    _Tim._ Wherefore?

    _Apem._ That I had no angry wit to be a lord. Art not[1717][1718]  235
    thou a merchant?[1718]

    _Mer._ Ay, Apemantus.

    _Apem._ Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!

    _Mer._ If traffic do it, the gods do it.

    _Apem._ Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee![1719]      240

                  _Trumpet sounds. Enter a_ Messenger.

    _Tim._ What trumpet's that?[1720]

    _Mess._'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
    All of companionship.

    _Tim._ Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.[1721]

                                              [_Exeunt some Attendants._

    You must needs dine with me: go not you hence                    245
    Till I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,[1722]
    Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.[1723]

               _Enter_ ALCIBIADES, _with the rest_.[1724]

    Most welcome, sir!

    _Apem._            So, so, there![1725][1726]
    Aches contract and starve your supple joints![1725][1726][1727]
    That there should be small love 'mongst these sweet
        knaves,[1725][1728]                                          250
    And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out[1725][1729]
    Into baboon and monkey.[1725][1729]

    _Alcib._ Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed[1730]
    Most hungerly on your sight.[1731]

    _Tim._                       Right welcome, sir!
    Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time[1732]                255
    In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.[1733]

                                      [_Exeunt all but Apemantus._[1734]

                        _Enter two_ Lords.[1735]

    _First Lord._ What time o' day is't, Apemantus?[1736]

    _Apem._ Time to be honest.

    _First Lord._ That time serves still.[1737]

    _Apem._ The most accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.[1738]    260

    _Sec. Lord._ Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?[1739]

    _Apem._ Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.

    _Sec. Lord._ Fare thee well, fare thee well.[1740]

    _Apem._ Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.

    _Sec. Lord._ Why, Apemantus?                                     265

    _Apem._ Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to[1741]
    give thee none.

    _First Lord._ Hang thyself!

    _Apem._ No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thy[1742]
    requests to thy friend.[1742]                                    270

    _Sec. Lord._ Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee[1742][1743]
    hence![1742]

    _Apem._ I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass. [_Exit._[1744]

    _First Lord._ He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,[1745][1746]
    And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoes[1745][1747]            275
    The very heart of kindness.[1745]

    _Sec. Lord._ He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold,
    Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays
    Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him,
    But breeds the giver a return exceeding                          280
    All use of quittance.[1748]

    _First Lord._         The noblest mind he carries
    That ever govern'd man.[1749]

    _Sec. Lord._ Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?[1749]

    _First Lord._ I'll keep you company.[1749][1750]      [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _A banqueting-room in Timon's house._[1751]

   _Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet served in_; FLAVIUS
    _and others attending; and then enter_ LORD TIMON, ALCIBIADES,
    Lords, Senators, _and_ VENTIDIUS. _Then comes, dropping after_
        _all_, APEMANTUS, _discontentedly, like himself_.[1752]

    _Ven._ Most honour'd Timon,[1753][1754]
    It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age,[1753]
    And call him to long peace.[1753]
    He is gone happy, and has left me rich:
    Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound                             5
    To your free heart, I do return those talents,
    Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help[1755]
    I derived liberty.

    _Tim._             O, by no means,
    Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love:[1756]
    I gave it freely ever; and there's none                           10
    Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
    If our betters play at that game, we must not dare[1757][1758]
    To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.[1758][1759]

    _Ven._ A noble spirit![1760][1761]

    _Tim._ Nay, my lords, ceremony was but devised at first[1760][1762]  15
    To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,[1760]
    Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
    But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
    Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes[1763]
    Than my fortunes to me.[1764]                     [_They sit._    20

    _First Lord._ My lord, we always have confess'd it.[1765]

    _Apem._ Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not?[1766]

    _Tim._ O, Apemantus, you are welcome.[1767]

    _Apem._                               No;[1768]
    You shall not make me welcome:[1768]
    I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.                       25

    _Tim._ Fie, thou'rt a churl; ye've got a humour there[1769]
    Does not become a man; 'tis much to blame.
    ey say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est;' but yond
        man[1770][1771][1772]
    is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by himself; for
        he[1770][1772][1773]
    does neither affect company, nor is he fit for't
        indeed.[1770][1774]                                           30

    _Apem._ Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon:[1775][1776]
    I come to observe; I give thee warning on't.[1775]

    _Tim._ I take no heed of thee; thou'rt an Athenian,[1777][1778]
    therefore welcome: I myself would have no power; prithee,[1777][1779]
    let my meat make thee silent.[1777]                               35

    _Apem._ I scorn thy meat; 'twould choke me, for I[1780][1781]
    should ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of[1780][1781]
    men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not! It grieves me to see[1780][1782]
    so many dip their meat in one man's blood; and all the[1780][1783]
    madness is, he cheers them up too.[1780][1784]                    40
    I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:
    Methinks they should invite them without knives;
    Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.[1785]
    There's much example for't; the fellow that sits next him[1786]
    now, parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in
        a[1786][1787]                                                 45
    divided draught, is the readiest man to kill him: 't
        has[1786][1788][1789]
    been proved. If I were a huge man, I should fear to
        drink[1786][1789][1790]
    at meals;[1786]
    Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:[1791]
    Great men should drink with harness on their throats.[1791]       50

    _Tim._ My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.[1792]

    _Sec. Lord._ Let it flow this way, my good lord.[1793]

    _Apem._ Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his[1794]
    tides well. Those healths will make thee and thy state[1794]
    look ill, Timon. Here's that which is too weak to be a[1794]      55
    sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire:[1794][1795]
    This and my food are equals; there's no odds:[1794][1796]
    Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.[1794][1797]

                          _Apemantus's Grace._

                Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
                I pray for no man but myself:                         60
                Grant I may never prove so fond,
                To trust man on his oath or bond,
                Or a harlot for her weeping,
                Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,
                Or a keeper with my freedom,                          65
                Or my friends, if I should need 'em.
                Amen. So fall to't:[1798]
                Rich men sin, and I eat root.  [_Eats and drinks._[1799]

    Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus![1800]

    _Tim._ Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.[1801]   70

    _Alcib._ My heart is ever at your service, my lord.

    _Tim._ You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than[1802]
    a dinner of friends.

    _Alcib._ So they were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no[1803]
    meat like 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.[1804]  75

    _Apem._ Would all those flatterers were thine enemies,[1805]
    then, that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em![1806]

    _First Lord._ Might we but have that happiness, my[1807]
    lord, that you would once use our hearts, whereby we
    might express some part of our zeals, we should think             80
    ourselves for ever perfect.

    _Tim._ O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves
    have provided that I shall have much help from you:[1808]
    how had you been my friends else? why have you that
        charitable[1809][1810]
    title from thousands, did not you chiefly belong
        to[1810][1811][1812]                                          85
    my heart? I have told more of you to myself than you can[1812]
    with modesty speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm
    you. O you gods, think I, what need we have any
    friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they were the[1813][1814]
    most needless creatures living, should we ne'er have use for[1814]  90
    'em, and would most resemble sweet instruments hung up[1814][1815]
    in cases, that keep their sounds to themselves. Why, I have[1816]
    often wished myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you.
    We are born to do benefits: and what better or properer
    can we call our own than the riches of our friends? O, what       95
    a precious comfort 'tis, to have so many, like brothers, commanding
    one another's fortunes! O joy, e'en made away[1817]
    ere't can be born! Mine eyes cannot hold out water,
        methinks:[1818][1819]
    to forget their faults, I drink to you.[1819]

    _Apem._ Thou weep'st to make them drink, Timon.[1820]            100

    _Sec. Lord._ Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
    And at that instant like a babe sprung up.[1793][1821]

    _Apem._ Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.

    _Third Lord._ I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.

    _Apem._ Much![1822]          [_Tucket, within._                  105

    _Tim._ What means that trump?

                        _Enter a_ Servant.[1823]

                                  How now!

    _Serv._ Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies most[1824]
    desirous of admittance.[1824]

    _Tim._ Ladies! what are their wills?

    _Serv._ There comes with them a forerunner, my lord,             110
    which bears that office, to signify their pleasures.

    _Tim._ I pray, let them be admitted.[1825]

                             _Enter_ Cupid.

    _Cup._ Hail to thee, worthy Timon! and to all[1826][1827][1828]
    That of his bounties taste! The five best senses[1827][1829]
    Acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely[1827]             115
    To gratulate thy plenteous bosom: th' ear,[1827]
    Taste, touch, and smell, pleased from thy table rise;[1827]
    They only now come but to feast thine eyes.[1827]

    _Tim._ They're welcome all; let 'em have kind admittance:[1830][1831]
    Music, make their welcome![1831][1832]            [_Exit Cupid._  120

    _First Lord._ You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.[1833]

  _Music. Re-enter_ Cupid, _with a mask of_ Ladies _as Amazons, with_
           _lutes in their hands, dancing and playing_.[1834]

    _Apem._ Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this
        way![1835][1836][1837]
    They dance! they are mad women.[1836][1837][1838]
    Like madness is the glory of this life,[1837][1839]
    As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.[1837][1840]         125
    We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves,[1837]
    And spend our flatteries, to drink those men[1837]
    Upon whose age we void it up again[1837]
    With poisonous spite and envy.[1837][1841]
    Who lives, that's not depraved or depraves?[1841][1842]          130
    Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves[1841]
    Of their friends' gift?[1841][1843]
    I should fear those that dance before me now
    Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done;[1844]
    Men shut their doors against a setting sun.[1845]                135

    _The_ Lords _rise from table, with much adoring of_ TIMON; _and
     to show their loves, each singles out an_ Amazon, _and all
    dance, men with women, a lofty strain or two to the hautboys,
                           and cease._[1846]

    _Tim._ You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,[1847]
    Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,[1848]
    Which was not half so beautiful and kind;
    You have added worth unto 't and lustre,[1849]
    And entertain'd me with mine own device:                         140
    I am to thank you for 't.[1850]

    _First Lady._ My lord, you take us even at the best.[1851]

    _Apem._ Faith, for the worst is filthy, and would not hold[1852]
    taking, I doubt me.[1852]

    _Tim._ Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:[1853][1854]  145
    Please you to dispose yourselves.[1853]

    _All Lad._ Most thankfully, my lord.[1855]

                                             [_Exeunt Cupid and Ladies._

    _Tim._ Flavius!

    _Flav._ My lord?

    _Tim._           The little casket bring me hither.

    _Flav._ Yes, my lord. [_Aside_] More jewels yet![1856][1857][1858]  150
    There is no crossing him in 's humour;[1857][1859]
    Else I should tell him--well, i' faith, I should--[1860]
    When all's spent, he'ld be cross'd then, an he could.[1861]
    'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,[1862]
    That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.[1863]      [_Exit._  155

    _First Lord._ Where be our men?[1864]

    _Serv._ Here, my lord, in readiness.

    _Sec. Lord._ Our horses![1865]

              _Re-enter_ FLAVIUS, _with the casket_.[1866]

    _Tim._ O my friends,[1867]
    I have one word to say to you: look you, my good lord,[1867][1868]  160
    I must entreat you, honour me so much[1867][1869]
    As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it,[1867][1870]
    Kind my lord.[1867][1871]

    _First Lord._ I am so far already in your gifts,--[1872]

    _All._ So are we all.[1873]                                      165

                           _Enter a_ Servant.

    _Serv._ My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate[1874][1875]
    newly alighted and come to visit you.[1875]

    _Tim._ They are fairly welcome.[1876]

    _Flav._ I beseech your honour, vouchsafe me a word; it[1877]
    does concern you near.[1877]                                     170

    _Tim._ Near! why, then, another time I'll hear thee: I[1878][1879]
    prithee, let's be provided to show them entertainment.[1879]

    _Flav._ [_Aside_] I scarce know how.[1880]

                        _Enter another_ Servant.

    _Sec. Serv._ May it please your honour, Lord Lucius[1881][1882][1883]
    Out of his free love hath presented to you[1882][1884]           175
    Four milk-white horses, trapp'd in silver.[1882][1885]

    _Tim._ I shall accept them fairly: let the presents
    Be worthily entertain'd.

                        _Enter a third_ Servant.

                             How now! what news?

    _Third Serv._ Please you, my lord, that honourable gentleman,[1886]
    Lord Lucullus, entreats your company to-morrow to[1886][1887]    180
    hunt with him, and has sent your honour two brace of[1886][1888]
    greyhounds.[1886]

    _Tim._ I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,[1889]
    Not without fair reward.[1889]

    _Flav._ [_Aside_] What will this come to?[1890][1891]
    He commands us to provide and give great gifts, and
        all[1891][1892]                                              185
    out of an empty coffer:[1891]
    Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
    To show him what a beggar his heart is,
    Being of no power to make his wishes good:
    His promises fly so beyond his state                             190
    That what he speaks is all in debt, he owes[1893][1894]
    For every word: he is so kind that he now[1893][1895]
    Pays interest for't; his land's put to their books.[1893][1896]
    Well, would I were gently put out of office,[1893]
    Before I were forced out![1893][1897]                            195
    Happier is he that has no friend to feed
    Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
    I bleed inwardly for my lord.[1898][1899]          [_Exit._

    _Tim._                        You do yourselves[1899]
    Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits.[1899]
    Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.[1899]                       200

    _Sec. Lord._ With more than common thanks I will receive[1900][1901]
    it.[1901]

    _Third Lord._ O, he's the very soul of bounty![1902]

    _Tim._ And now I remember, my lord, you gave good[1903][1904]
    words the other day of a bay courser I rode on. 'Tis
        yours,[1903][1905]                                           205
    because you liked it.[1903]

    _Third Lord._ O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord,[1906][1907]
    in that.[1908]

    _Tim._ You may take my word, my lord; I know, no[1909]
    man can justly praise, but what he does affect: I weigh[1909]    210
    my friend's affection with mine own: I'll tell you true.
        I'll[1909][1910]
    call to you.[1909][1911]

    _All Lords._ O, none so welcome.[1907]

    _Tim._ I take all and your several visitations
    So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give:[1912]                 215
    Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,[1912]
    And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades,
    Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;
    It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living[1913]
    Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast                 220
    Lie in a pitch'd field.

    _Alcib._ Ay, defiled land, my lord.[1914][1915]

    _First Lord._ We are so virtuously bound--[1915][1916]

    _Tim._ And so am I to you.[1915]

    _Sec. Lord._ So infinitely endear'd--[1915][1917][1918]          225

    _Tim._ All to you. Lights, more lights![1918][1919]

    _First Lord._ The best of happiness, honour and fortunes, keep
        with you, Lord Timon![1920][1921]

    _Tim._ Ready for his friends.[1920][1922]

                                  [_Exeunt all but Apemantus and Timon._

    _Apem._                       What a coil's here![1923][1924]
    Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums![1924][1925]            230
    I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums[1924]
    That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs:[1924]
    Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs.
    Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.

    _Tim._ Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen,                  235
    I would be good to thee.

    _Apem._ No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too,[1926]
    there would be none left to rail upon thee; and then thou[1926]
    wouldst sin the faster. Thou givest so long, Timon, I fear[1926]
    me thou wilt give away thyself in paper shortly: what[1926][1927]  240
    needs these feasts, pomps and vain-glories?[1926][1928]

    _Tim._ Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am[1926][1929]
    sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and come with[1926]
    better music.[1926]                              [_Exit._

    _Apem._ So: thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not[1930][1931]  245
    then: I'll lock thy heaven from thee.[1930][1932]
    O, that men's ears should be[1930]
    To counsel deaf, but not to flattery![1930]       [_Exit._

FOOTNOTES:

[1597] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. ScÃ¦na Prima. Ff. See note (I).

Athens.] Capell.

A hall in Timon's house.] Rowe.

[1598] Merchant, and others,] Malone. Merchant and divers others,
Capell. Merchant, and Mercer, Ff. and Merchant, Johnson.

[1599] Poet. _Good...._ Poet. _I have_] Poet. _Good day._ Pain. _Good
day, sir._ Poet. _I am ... well. I have_ Farmer conj. See note (II).

[1600] _Good day_] _Good day, good day_ Capell. _Good day, good_
Seymour conj.

_I am_] _Good sir, I'm_ Singer conj.

_you're_] _y'are_ F1 F2 F3. _ye are_ F4. _you are_ Capell.

[1601] _grows_] _goes_ Theobald.

[1602] _strange_] _so strange_ Rowe.

[1603] _Which_] _That_ Johnson conj.

[1604] _See, Magic_] Paint. _See!_ Poet _Magick_ Johnson conj.

[1605] _Hath ... merchant._] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[1606] _A most_] om. Seymour conj.

_man_] om. Capell.

[1607] _goodness: He passes._] _goodness._ Pope (omitting _He passes_).
_goodness. He passes--_ Theobald. _goodness: Indeed, he passes._
Seymour conj. _goodness, He passes._ Staunton.

[1608] _passes_] _surpasses_ Jackson conj.

[1609] _I_] _Look, I_ Steevens conj.]

_here--_] Collier. _here_: Capell. _heere._ F1 F2. _here._ F3 F4.

[1610] _for ... sir?_] A separate line in Pope.

[1611] [Reciting to himself] Repeating ... Hanmer (Warburton conj.).
om. Qq Ff.

[1612] [Looking on the jewel] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[1613] _ye_] _you_ Capell.

[1614] _You ... lord._] As verse first by Pope. Prose in Ff.

[1615] _You are_] _You're_ Pope.

_are ... dedication_] As one line, Seymour conj., ending the previous
line at _You_.

[1616] _idly_] _idlely_ F1.

[1617] _gum, which oozes_] Johnson. _gowne, which uses_ F1 F2. _gown,
which uses_ F3 F4. _gum, which issues_ Pope.

[1618] _struck_] F3 F4. _stroke_ F1 F2.

[1619] _flies Each_] _flies; Each_ Mason conj.

_flies ... chafes_] _flies. Eche_ (_bound_) _it chafes_ Becket conj.

[1620] _chafes_] Theobald. _chases_ Ff.

[1621] Capell, reading with Hanmer in line 28, ends the lines _sir ...
heels ... piece ... piece._

[1622] _When_] _And when_ Hanmer.

[1623] _'Tis a good piece_] _'Tis a good piece, indeed_ Steevens
conj. _It is a goodly piece._ Seymour conj.

[1624] Pope ends the line at _'tis._

[1625] _grace ... standing_] _standing ... graces_ or _grace Speaks
understanding_ Johnson conj. _Grace Speaks its own standing_ Mason
conj. _grace Speaks! 'tis one standing_ Jackson conj.

[1626] _I will_] _I'll_ Pope.

[1627] _these_] _those_ Theobald.

and pass over.] Capell. Omitted in Ff.

[1628] _lord is_] _lord's_ Steevens (1793).

[1629] _man_] Theobald. _men_ Ff.

[1630] _Look, moe!_] _Looke moe._ Ff. _Look, more._ Rowe. _Look you
now, there's more._ Seymour conj.

[1631] _beneath world_] _beneath-world_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[1632] _particularly_] _particular_ Theobald.

[1633] _wax_] _verse_ Collier (Collier MS.).

_levell'd_] _leven'd_ Warburton.

[1634] _hold_;] Here Keightley marks a lacuna.

[1635] _But_] _It_ Hanmer.

[1636] _tract_] _track_ Hanmer.

[1637] _I will_] _I'll_ Pope.

[1638] _creatures_] _natures_ Hanmer.

[1639] _services_] _service_ Pope.

[1640] _abhor himself_] _make himself abhorr'd_ Hanmer.

[1641] _together_] om. Steevens conj.

[1642] _Sir_,] om. Pope.

[1643] _Feign'd ... mount_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[1644] _Lord_] om. Pope.

[1645] _present grace_] _puissant grace_ Anon. conj.

_to present slaves_] _to peasant slaves_ S. Walker conj. _t'
obedient slaves_ Anon. conj.

[1646] _conceived to scope._] Johnson. _conceyv'd, to scope_ Ff.
_conceiv'd to th' scope._ Theobald. _conceiv'd, to scope_, Warburton.
_conceiv'd, your scope_ Heath conj.

[1647] _sir_,] om. Pope.

[1648] _value_,] Theobald. _valew_; F1 F2. _value_; F3 F4.

[1649] _tendance_] _'tendance_ Johnson.

[1650] _Rain_] _Roun_ (for _Round_) Delius.

[1651] _him_] om. Pope.

[1652] _hands_] F2 F3 F4. _hand_ F1.

_slip_] Rowe. _sit_ Ff. _sink_ Delius conj.

[1653] _moral_] om. Seymour conj., reading _'Tis ... show_ as one line.

[1654] _Fortune's_] Malone. _Fortunes_ F1. _Fortune_ F2 F3 F4.

[1655] _mean_] _men's_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.).

[1656] _Trumpets sound._] Ff. _Flourish._ Capell.

Enter ...] Edd. Enter Lord Timon, addressing himselfe curteously to
every Sutor. Ff. Enter Timon, attended, Servant of Ventidius talking
with him. Capell.

SCENE II. Pope.

_Imprison'd_] F1 F2. _Imprisoned_ F3 F4.

_is he_] om. Steevens conj.

[To a Messenger. Rowe.

[1657] Mess.] Ser. Capell.

[1658] _failing_] F1. _failing to him_ F2 F3 F4. _failing him_ Capell.

[1659] _Ventidius! Well_] Rowe. _Ventidius well_ F1 F2 F3. _Ventidius,
well_ F4.

[1660] _must need_] _most needs_ F3 F4.

[1661] _binds him_] _binds him to be grateful_ Seymour conj.

[1662] _All ... honour_] _All health and happiness attend your
honour_ Seymour conj.

[1663] _call_] _I pray your honour, call_ Seymour conj., ending the
previous line at _Timon_.

[1664] [Enter Lucilius. Rowe. Lucilius comes forward from among the
Attendants. Dyce.

[1665] _Here_] _I'm here, so please you_ Seymour conj.

[1666] _Lord_] Rowe. _L._ Ff.

[1667] _o'_] Rowe. _a'_ Ff.

[1668] _prithee_] _pray thee_ F4.

[1669] _The man ... be, Timon: His_] _The man ... be, Timon. His_
Theobald. _The man ... be, Timon, His_ F4. _The man ... be Timon, His_
F1 F2 F3. _The man ... be, His_ Pope. _The man ... obey Timon. His_
Hanmer. _The man ... Therefore well be him, Timon. His_ Johnson conj.
_The man ... be Timon's. His_ or _The man is honest, Therefore he
will be--_ Old Ath. _Timon, His_ Staunton conj.

[1670] _Therefore ... Timon_] _Therefore he'll be my son_ Theobald
conj. _Therefore he will be Timon's servant here_ Capell conj.
_Therefore in this he will be honest, Timon_ Seymour conj. _Therefore
he will be rewarded, Timon_ Singer conj. _Therefore he will be blest,
Lord Timon_ Keightley.

[1671] _She is_] _Alack, my noble lord, she's_ Seymour conj.

[1672] _levity's_] F3 F4. _levities_ F1 F2.

[1673] [To Lucilius] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1674] _choose_] F1. _chose_ F2. _chuse_ F3 F4.

[1675] _endow'd_] Capell. _endowed_ Ff.

[1676] _If she be mated_] _if mated_ Steevens conj., reading
_Endow'd ... husband_ as one line.

[1677] _This ... long_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[1678] _My ... promise_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[1679] _owed_] _own'd_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[1680] [Exeunt ...] Theobald. Exit. Ff. Exit Luc. Pope.

[1681] _Vouchsafe ... lordship!_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[presenting his Poem. Capell.

[1682] [presenting it. Capell.

[1683] _The painting_] _The painted_ Hanmer.

[1684] _He is_] _He's_ Anon. conj.

_these_] F1. _the_ F2 F3 F4. om. Pope.

[1685] _ye_] _you_ Johnson.

[1686] _you, gentleman_] _ye, gentlemen_ Johnson.

[to the Merchant. Capell.

[1687] _suffer'd_] Pope, _suffered_ Ff.

_under praise_] _underpraise_ Steevens (1773).

[1688] _satiety_] F4. _saciety_ F1 F2 F3.

[1689] _unclew_] _undo_ Pope.

[1690] _prized by their masters_] _priz'd by their masters_ F4.
_priz'd so by their masters_ Rowe. _by their masters priz'd_ Pope.

[1691] _the wearing_] _wearing_ Steevens (1793), reading _You ...
mock'd_ as one line.

[1692] Pope ends the line at _here_.

_will you be chid?_] _Sour Apemantus; will ye now be chid?_ Seymour
conj.

[1693] Enter Apemantus.] Pope. Enter Apemantus. F4 (after line 176).
Enter Apermantus. F1 F2 F3 (after line 176).

[1694] SCENE III. Pope.

_We'll bear, with_] _We will bear, with_ Steevens (1778). _Wee'l
beare with_ F1. _Wee'l I beare with_ F2. _Wee'l bear with_ F3.
_We'll bear with_ F4. _We'll bear it with_ Pope. _We'll bear e'en
with_ Seymour conj.

[1695] _Good ... Apemantus_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_Apemantus_] F4. _Apermantus_ F1 F2 F3.

[1696] _gentle ... morrow_;] _gentle stay: for my good morrow_,
Becket conj.

_thou_] om. Pope.

[1697] _When ... honest._] _When I am Timon's dog ... honest._
Hanmer. Poet. _When will that be?_ Apem. _When thou art ... honest._
Warburton conj. _When thou ... honest--_ Johnson. Mer. _When will
that be?_ Ape. _When thou ... honest._ Capell.

[1698] _Are_] _Why, are_ Seymour conj.

[1699] _know_] _do know_ Seymour conj.

_Apemantus?_] F1 F2. _Apemantus._ F3 F4.

[1700] _Apemantus_] F3 F4. _Apemantus?_ F1 F2. _Apemantus; passing
proud_. Seymour conj.

[1701] _nothing_] _nought_ Seymour conj.

[1702] _Whither_] F4. _Whether_ F1 F2 F3.

[1703] _thou'lt_] F4. _thou't_ F1 F2 F3.

[1704] _likest_] Hanmer. _lik'st_ Ff.

[1705] _best_] _better_ Hanmer.

[1706] _it?_] F3 F4. _it._ F1. _it_: F2.

[1707] Pain.] Poet. Steevens (1773).

_You're_] Capell. _Y'are_ Ff. _You are_ Steevens.

[1708] _mother's_] F4. _mothers_ F1 F2 F3.

[1709] _An_] Capell. _And_ Ff. _If_ Pope.

[1710] _O ... bellies_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[1711] _So ... labour_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_So thou_] F3 F4. _So, thou_ F1. _So. thou_ F2.

_apprehend'st it_] _apprehendest it_ Dyce. _apprehend'st_ Johnson.

_it: take_] _it. Take_ Ff. _it, take_ Staunton.

[1712] _cost_] F3 F4. _cast_ F1 F2.

[1713] _Not ... poet!_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[1714] _Art not_] Art thou Rowe (ed. 2). _Art thou not_ Theobald.

[1715] _feigned_] _feign'd_ F1.

[1716] _of thee_] _o' thee_ Warburton.

[1717] _That ... lord._] _Angry that I had no wit,--to be a lord. or
Angry to be a lord,--that I had no wit._ Blackstone conj. _That I had
no angry wit.--To be a lord!_ Malone conj. _Angry that I had no wit
to be a lord._ Rann. _That I had no ampler wit than be a lord._ Anon.
conj.

_no angry wit_] Ff. _so hungry a wit_ Theobald (Warburton). _so
wrong'd my wit_ Heath conj. _an angry wish_ Mason conj. _no aug'ry
wit_ Becket conj. _known angry wit_ Jackson conj. _so hungry a wish_
Collier (Collier MS.). _an empty wit_ Singer, ed. 2 (Singer MS.). (_now
angry_) _wish'd_ or (_so angry_) _will_ Singer conj. _an angry fit_
Grant White conj. _no angry wit_, Delius.

_be_] _bay_ Staunton conj.

[1718] _not thou_] _thou not_ Pope.

[1719] _Traffic's_] _Traffick's_ F4. _Traffickes_ F1 F2 F3.

_and_] _and so_ Hanmer. _and may_ Keightley.

Trumpet ...] Trumpets sound ... Pope. Trumpet. Enter a Servant. Capell.

[1720] _trumpet's_] F3 F4. _trumpets_ F1 F2.

[1721] [Exeunt ...] Capell. om. Ff.

[1722] _when_] F1. _and when_ F2 F3 F4. _you, when_ Dyce (ed. 2).

_dinner's_] F3 F4. _dinners_ F1 F2. _the dinner's_ Anon. conj.

[1723] _piece. I_] F3 F4. _I peece_, F1 F2. _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

with the rest.] Ff. and his Company. Capell.

[1724] [Bowing and embracing. Pope. they salute. Capell.

[1725] _So, so ... monkey._] As verse first by Capell. Prose in Ff.

[1726] _there! Aches_] Capell. _their Aches_ Ff. _Aches_ Pope. _there,
bravely carried. Aches_ Seymour conj.

[1727] _starve_] F3 F4. _sterve_ F1 F2.

[1728] _'mongst_] Capell. _amongest_ F1 F2. _amongst_ F3 F4.

[1729] _man's ... monkey_] _man Is bred out into a baboon, and a
monkey_ Seymour conj.

[1730] _Sir, you have_] F1 F2 F3. _You have_ F4. _You have even_
Hanmer.

[1731] _on_] _upon_ Seymour conj.

_sir_] om. Seymour conj.

[1732] _depart_] _do part_ Theobald.

[1733] _In ... in_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[1734] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt. Manet Apemantus. Rowe. Exeunt. Ff.

[1735] Enter two Lords.] Ff. Enter Lucius and Lucullus. Rowe.

[1736] SCENE IV. Pope.

First Lord.] 1 Lord. Ff. Luc. Rowe (and throughout the scene).

_o'_] Collier. _a_ Ff. _of_ Capell.

[1737] _That_] _Ay, that_ Hanmer.

[1738] _The_] _Then_ Anon. conj.

_most_] _more_ Hanmer.

[1739] Sec. Lord.] 2 Ff. Lucull. Rowe (and throughout the scene).

_feast?_] Capell. _feast._ Ff.

[1740] _Fare thee ... fare thee_] F4. _Farthee ... farthee_ F1 F2 F3.

[1741] _Shouldst_] _Thou should'st_ Rowe.

[1742] _No ... hence_] Prose in Pope. Four lines in Ff.

[1743] _unpeaceable_] _unappeasable_ Collier MS.

_or I'll_] _O I'll_ Rowe (ed. 2). _or--I'll_ Pope.

[1744] _o'_] Rowe. _a'_ Ff.

[Exit.] Exit Apem. Hanmer. om. Ff.

[1745] _He's ... kindness._] As in Capell. Four lines in Ff, ending
_humanity ... in, ... outgoes ... kindness._ Three in Pope, ending
_humanity ... bounty?... kindness._

_humanity_] _all humanity_ Hanmer.

[1746] _Come_] _Comes_ F1.

[1747] _bounty?_] F4. _bountie_: F1. _bounty_: F2 F3.

_he_] _He sure_ Pope.

[1748] _of quittance_] _or quittance_ Johnson conj.

[1749] _That ... company_] As two lines, the first ending _live_, in
Capell.

[1750] First Lord.] 1. L. Capell. Luc. Rowe. om. Ff.

_I'll ... company_] om. Seymour conj.

[1751] SCENE II.] Capell. SCENE V. Pope.

A banqueting-room ...] Another Apartment ... Theobald. The same. A
State-Room. Capell.

[1752] Flavius and others attending;] Flavius, and other Domesticks,
waiting. Capell. om. Ff.

Alcibiades ... Ventidius.] Lucius, Lucullus, Sempronius and other
Athenian Senators, with Ventidius. Rowe. the States, the Athenian
Lords, Ventigius which Timon redeem'd from prison. Ff (Ventidius F4).

dropping ...] Ff. dropping in ... Capell.

like himself] om. Pope.

[1753] _Most ... peace_] As in Ff. See note (III).

[1754] _honour'd_] Pope. _honoured_ Ff.

[1755] _Doubled with_] _Doubl'd, with_ Capell.

[1756] _Ventidius_] F4. _Ventigius_ F1 F2 F3.

[1757] _If_] _If that_ Seymour conj., ending the lines _must ...
faults ... lords ... first_.

_If ... game_,] _Our betters play that game;_ Johnson conj.

[1758] _not dare ... fair_] _not._ Apem. _Dare to imitate ... fair_
Warburton.

[1759] _them_] om. Pope. _them in it_ Seymour conj.

[1760] _A noble ... welcomes_] Capell ends the lines _ceremony ...
first ... welcomes._ Malone, _lords, ... first ... welcomes._ Steevens
(1793), _ceremony ... gloss ... welcomes._

[1761] [They all stand ceremoniously looking on Timon. Johnson. Die
GÃ¤ste complimentiren sich um den hÃ¶heren oder niederen Sitz an der
Tafel. Delius conj.

[1762] _my lords_] om. Pope, _lords_ Seymour conj.

_ceremony_] _Your ceremony_ Seymour conj.

[1763] _sit_] _fit_ F2.

[1764] _Than my fortunes_] _Than they_ Pope. _Than my fortunes are_
Keightley.

[They sit.] They sit down. Rowe. om. Ff.

[1765] First Lord.] 1 Lord. Ff. Luc. Rowe (and throughout the scene).

_My lord_] om. Pope.

[1766] _hang'd_] _handg'd_ F1.

[1767] _Apemantus_] F3 F4. _Apermantus_ F1 F2.

[1768] _No ... welcome_] As in Capell. One line in Ff. Prose in Pope.

[1769] _thou'rt_] Capell. _th'art_ Ff. _thou art_ Steevens.]

_ye've_] _ye'have_ F1. _ye have_ F2 F3 F4. _you have_ Capell.

[1770] _They ... indeed._] Prose by Edd. (Globe Ed.). As five lines,
ending _est, ... angry ... himselfe: ... companie, ... indeed,_ in Ff.

[1771] _lords_,] _lords, that_ Pope.

_yond_] _yonder_ Pope.

[1772] _man is_] _man's_ Steevens (1793).

[1773] _ever angry_] Rowe. _verie angrie_ F1. _very angry_ F2 F3 F4.
_very anger_ Steevens conj.

_let_] _And let_ Hanmer, ending the previous line at _go._

[1774] _for't_] _for it_ Hanmer.

[1775] _Let ... on't_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Pope.

[1776] _Let_] _Do, let_ Capell.

_stay_] _stay here_ Keightley.

_thine apperil_] _thy peril_ Pope. _thine own peril_ Capell.

[1777] _I ... silent._] Prose in Ff. Three lines, ending _Athenian, ...
have ... silent,_ in Capell. Three, ending _Athenian ... power ...
silent_, in Steevens.

[1778] _thou'rt_] Capell. _Th'art_ Ff. _thou art_ Steevens.

[1779] _therefore_] _And therefore_ Capell.

_power_;] _power_, Ff. _power_--Rowe. _poor._ Johnson conj.

_prithee_] _but, pr'ythee_ Capell.

[1780] _I scorn ... too._] Prose in Ff. Pope prints _I ... see_ as
prose, _So ... blood, And.... too_ as two lines. Six lines, ending
_should ... number ... not!... meat ... is, ... too,_ in Capell.

[1781] _'twould ... flatter thee_] _for I ... flatter thee: 'twould
choke me_ Becket conj.

_for ... ne'er_] _'fore ... e'er_ Warburton.

[1782] _eat_] Rowe. _eats_ F1 F4. _eates_ F2 F3.

_'em_] _it_ Hanmer. _them_ Steevens.

_It_] _'T_ Capell.

[1783] _their_] F3 F4. _there_ F1 F2.

[1784] _too_] _to't_ Warburton conj.

[1785] _their meat_] _there meate_ F1.

[1786] _There's ... meals_;] Prose in Ff. Five lines, ending _that ...
pledges ... draught, ... prov'd ... drink,_ (omitting _at meals_) in
Pope.

[1787] _pledges_] _and pledges_ Pope.

[1788] _draught_,] Rowe. _draught_: Ff.

[1789] _him: 't has been proved. If_] Rowe. _him: 'Tas been proved, if_
F1 F2 F3 (_been_ F3). _him. 'T has been proved, if_ F4.

[1790] _If I_] Put in a separate line by Steevens (1793).

_If I were a huge_] _Were I a great_ Pope.

_man_,] _man now_ Capell, reading _If ... fear_ as one line.

_I should_] _'should_ S. Walker conj., reading as Steevens.

[1791] _Lest ... throats._] Verse first in Rowe (ed. 2). Prose in Ff.

[1792] _lord, in_] _love in_ Anon. ap. Johnson conj.

[1793] Sec. Lord.] Lucull. Rowe.

[1794] _Flow ... gods._] See note (IV).

[1795] _sinner_] _fire_ Collier (Collier MS.). _liar_ Keightley.

[1796] _equals_] F1. _equall_ F2. _equal_ F3 F4.

[1797] Apemantus's Grace.] F4. Apermantus ... F1. Apemantus ... F2 F3.
om. Capell.

[1798] _Amen. So_] _Amen, amen; so_ Theobald. _Amen, amen; so I_ Farmer
MS. conj.

[1799] _sin_] _sing_ Farmer MS. conj. _dine_ Singer conj.

[Eats and drinks.] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1800] [falls to his dinner apart. Capell.

[1801] _Captain_] As in Pope. As a separate line in Ff.

_Captain Alcibiades_] Hanmer. _Captaine, Alcibiades_ Ff (_Captain_, F3
F4).

[1802] _be_] _been_ Pope (ed. 2).

[1803] _bleeding-new_] Hyphened by Steevens (1793).

[1804] _best_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[1805] _those_] _these_ Rowe.

[1806] _that then thou_] _that thou_ Pope (ed. 2).

[1807] _that_] _the_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1808] _much_] _as much_ Rowe.

[1809] _have you_] _have you not_ Heath conj.

[1810] _charitable_] _character and_ Hanmer.

[1811] _thousands, did_] Theobald. _thousands? Did_ Ff.

[1812] _did not you ... my heart_] _did I not ... your hearts_
Johnson conj.

[1813] _ne'er_] _nere_ F1 F2 F3. _never_ F4.

[1814] _they were ... for 'em_,] Omitted by Pope. See note (V).

[1815] _and would_] _they would_ Pope.

_most resemble_] _resemble most_ S. Walker conj.

[1816] _keep_] _keepes_ F1.

_their_] _there_ F1.

[1817] _joy_] Rowe. _joyes_ F1 F2 F3. _joys_ F4.

_made away_] _made a joy_ Hanmer.

[1818] _ere't_] F3. _er't_ F1 F2. _e're't_ F4. _ere it_ Steevens.

_hold out_] _hold_ Rowe.

[1819] _hold out water, methinks: to_] _hold out; they water. Methinks,
to_ Johnson conj.

_methinks: to ... faults, I_] Rowe. _me thinks, to ... faults. I_ Ff.
_Methinks to ... faults, I_ Johnson.

[1820] _weep'st to_] _weepest but to_ Hanmer.

_drink_] _drink thee_ Hanmer.

[1821] _like a babe_] _a like babe_ Rann. _like a babe's_ Becket conj.

[1822] _Much!_] Pope. _Much_. Ff.

[Tucket, within.] Sound Tucket. Enter the Maskers of Amazons with Lutes
in their hands, dauncing and playing. Ff.

[1823] Enter a Servant. _How now!_] Dyce. _How now?_ Enter Servant. Ff.

[1824] _Please ... admittance_.] Prose in Pope. Two lines, the first
ending _ladies_, in Ff.

[1825] Enter Cupid.] Capell. Enter Cupid with the Maske of Ladies. Ff.

[1826] SCENE VI. Pope.

[1827] See note (VI).

[1828] _thee, worthy_] _the worthy_ Hanmer.

[1829] _best_] _blest_ Capell conj.

[1830] _They're_] F4. _They'r_ F1. _Their_ F2 F3.

_'em_] _them_ Capell.

[1831] _They're ... welcome!_] Verse in F3 F4. Prose in F1 F2.

[1832] _Music, make_] Steevens. _Musicke make_ F1 F2. _Musick make_
F3 F4. _Let musick make_ Pope. _Musick, make known_ Capell.

[Exit Cupid.] Capell. om Ff.

[1833] First Lord.] 1. L. Capell. Luc. Ff.

_ample_] Ff. _amply_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_you're_] Rowe (ed. 2). _y'are_ F1. _ye are_ F2 F3 F4. _you are_ Rowe
(ed. 1).

[1834] Music. Re-enter ...] Capell, substantially. om. Ff.

[1835] _Hoy-day_] As in Pope. In a separate line in Ff. _Hoy-day, why_
Hanmer, ending the line at _vanity. Heyday_ Johnson.

[1836] _Hoy-day ... dance!_] _Why, hey-day ... dancing!_ Seymour
conj., ending the line at _vanity_.

[1837] _Hoyday ... envy._] Prose by Hudson.

[1838] _They dance!_] Steevens. _They dance?_ F1 F2 F3. _They dance_,
F4. _And they dance,_ Hanmer. _And they dance!_ Capell. They dance (a
stage direction). Tyrwhitt conj. Omitted by Rann.

_they are_] _These are_ Rann (Tyrwhitt conj.).

[1839] _life_,] After this Warburton marks a line omitted.

[1840] _As ... root._] As this pomp shows, take a little oil and root
(as stage direction). Staunton conj. After this S. Walker conjectures
that a line is lost.

[1841] _With ... gift?_] As three lines, ending _that's not ...
bears ... gift?_, in Hanmer.

[1842] _depraved_] _deprav'd_ F4.

[1843] _gift?_] F4. _guift_: F1. _gift_ F2 F3. _gift? Timon, were I as
thou_, S. Walker conj.

[1844] _'t has_] Rowe (ed. 2). _'Tas_ F1. _Tas_ F2. _'T'as_ F3 F4.

[1845] _a_] _the_ Pope (ed. 2).

[1846] singles] Pope. single Ff. singling Theobald.

an Amazon,] a Lady, Hanmer.

[1847] _You ... ladies_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_much_] _very much_ Hanmer. _a much_ Capell.

_fair_] _fairest_ Steevens conj.

[1848] _Set_] F1. _Sets_ F2 F3 F4.

[1849] _You have_] _You've_ Pope.

_worth_] _grace_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_and_] F1. _and lively_ F2 F3 F4. _and life and_ Anon. conj.

[1850] _for't_] _for it_ F4.

[1851] First Lady.] 1 Lady. Steevens (Johnson and Heath conj.). Ladies.
Theobald conj. 1 Lord. Ff. Luc. Rowe.

_even_] _ever_ Collier, ed. 2 (Thirlby conj.).

[1852] _Faith ... me_] Two lines of verse, the first ending _hold_, by
Capell.

[1853] _Ladies ... yourselves_] As in Ff. Prose in Pope.

[1854] _is_] _is within_ Capell, ending the line at _banquet_.

[1855] [Exeunt....] Capell. Exeunt. Ff.

[1856] [Aside] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1857] _Yes ... humour_] Arranged as in Ff. Prose in Pope. Hanmer reads
_Yes, ... humour_, as prose, the rest as verse.

[1858] _jewels yet! There is_] _jewels! There's_ Capell, ending the
previous line at _lord_.

[1859] _in's_] _in his_ Capell. _in this his_ Ritson conj.

[1860] _him--well_] Rowe. _him well_ Ff.

[1861] _an_] Capell. _and_ Ff. _if_ Pope.

[1862] _had_] _has_ F4.

[1863] [Exit.] F1. om. F2 F3 F4. Exit, and returns with the Casket.
Capell.

[1864] First Lord.] Luc. Rowe. Lucul. Theobald (ed. 2).

_men?_] _men, ho?_ Capell.

[1865] Sec. Lord.] Lucul. Rowe. Luc. Theobald (ed. 2).

[1866] Re-enter....] Edd. om. Ff.

[1867] _O my friends ... lord_] As in Ff. As four lines, ending
_word ... must ... to ... lord_ Capell.

_friends_] _good friends_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1868] _look you, my good_] _look my_ Pope.

_lord_] F3 F4. _L._ F1 F2.

[1869] _much_] _much_, F1 F3 F4. _much._ F2.

[1870] _jewel_;] Capell. _Iewell_, F1 F2. _Jewel_, F3 F4.

_accept it_] F1. _accept_ F2 F3 F4. _accept't_ Anon. conj.

[1871] _my_] om. Hanmer.

[1872] First Lord.] Luc. Rowe.

_gifts,--_] _gifts--_ Pope. _guifts._ F1 F2. _gifts_, F3. _gifts._ F4.

[1873] [Exe. Lucius and Lucullus. Rowe.

[1874] SCENE VII. Pope.

[1875] _My lord ... you_] As in Ff. Verse in Capell, ending the first
line _senate_.

[1876] [Enter Flavius. Ff. Re-enter Flavius. Pope. Omitted by Capell.

[1877] _I beseech ... near_] Prose in Ff. Verse in Capell, ending the
first line at _honour_.

[1878] _Near!_] _Me near?_ Hanmer, reading as prose.

[1879] _Near ... entertainment._] See note (VII).

[1880] [Aside] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1881] Sec. Serv.] 2 Serv. Rowe. Ser. Ff.

[1882] _May it ... silver_] As in Ff. Prose in Pope.

[1883] _Lord_] _the Lord_ Capell.

[1884] _to_] om. Pope (ed. 2).

[1885] _silver_] _silver-harness_ Keightley.

[1886] _Please you ... greyhounds_] As four lines of verse by Capell,
ending _gentleman, ... company ... you ... grey-hounds._

[1887] _Lord_] _The lord_ Capell.

[1888] _your honour_] _you_ Capell.

[1889] _I'll ... reward_] As in Hanmer. Two lines in Ff, the first
ending _him_. Prose in Pope.

[1890] [Aside] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1891] _What will ... coffer_] As in Ff. Prose in Pope. Three lines,
ending _to?... give ... coffer_, in Hanmer. Three lines, ending,
_to?... gifts, ... coffer_, in Steevens.

[1892] _He_] _Here he_ Hanmer. _He here_ Capell, following Hanmer's
arrangement.

_all_] _all the while_ Ritson conj.

[1893] _That ... out!_] Arranged as by Capell, after Hanmer. Four
lines, ending _word: ... for't; ... I were ... out,_ in Ff.

[1894] _he owes_] _he ows_ F1. _owes_ F2 F3 F4.

[1895] _that_] om. Seymour conj.

_now_] om. Theobald (ed. 2).

[1896] _land's_] F1 F4. _lands_ F2 F3.

[1897] _Before_] F1. _ere_ F2 F3. _e'er_ F4.

_Before ... forced out_] Omitted in Hanmer.

_out_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[1898] _bleed_] _do bleed_ Capell.

[1899] _You ... love._] As in Malone. Three lines, ending _wrong, ...
merits ... love,_ in Ff. Prose in Pope. Two lines, ending _too
much ... love_, in Capell, omitting _Here_, line 201. Three lines, ending
_too much ... trifle ... love_, in Steevens (1773).

[1900] Sec. Lord.] 2 Lord Ff. 1. Lord. Rowe.

[1901] _With ... it_] One line in Pope (ed 1). Two lines, the first
ending _thankes_, in Ff. Prose in Pope (ed. 2).

[1902] _O, he's_] F1. _O has_ F2 F3. _O ha's_ F4. _He has_ Pope. _O! he
is_ Steevens.

[1903] _And ... it._] Prose in Ff.

[1904] _I remember_] _I do remember me_ Capell, reading 205-204 as
four lines, ending _now ... gave ... courser ... it._ Three lines,
ending _gave ... courser ... it_, Steevens (1773). _I remember me_
Steevens (1793), arranging as before.

[1905] _rode_] F3 F4. _rod_ F1 F2.

_'Tis_] _it is_ Capell.

[1906] Third Lord.] Rann (Capell conj.). 1. L. Ff. 2. Lord. Rowe.

[1907] _O_,] om. Steevens (1793).

[1908] _in that_] Put in a separate line by Capell.

[1909] _You may ... to you._] Prose in Ff. Johnson prints _Can ...
you,_ as three lines of verse, ending _affect; ... own ... you._
Capell makes four lines, the first ending _know_. Steevens ends the
first at _man_.

[1910] _mine_] _my_ F4.

_own_:] _owne_: F1. _owne?_ F2. _own?_ F3 F4.

_I'll tell_] _I tell_ Hanmer.

[1911] _to you_] _on you_ Pope.

[1912] _give: Methinks_,] _give My thanks,_ Hanmer.

[1913] _It comes_] _I'll come_ Hanmer.

_for all_] om. Pope.

[1914] _Ay, defiled_] _I, defil'd_ F1. _I defie_ F2 F3 F4. _I'
defiled_ Johnson. _In defiled_ Steevens (1778).

[1915] _Ay, ... endear'd_] Arranged as in Ff. Verse in Capell, ending
line 224 _And so_.

[1916] _bound--_] Pope. _bound._ Ff.

[1917] _infinitely_] _infinite_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_endear'd--_] Rowe. _endeer'd._ Ff.

[1918] _endear'd--_ Tim. _All to you. Lights_] _endear'd all to
you--_ Tim. _Lights_ Heath conj.

[1919] _more lights_] F1. _more lights, more light_ F2 F3 F4. _more
lights, more lights_ Pope.

[1920] _The ... Timon!_] As prose by Edd. Two lines, the first ending
_fortunes_, in Ff. Steevens ends the first line _happiness_.

[1921] _fortunes_] _fortune_ S. Walker conj.

[1922] _with_] om. Pope.

_Timon!_] _Timon--_ Pope.

[1923] _Ready_] _Ready ever_ Steevens conj. _Still ready_ Seymour conj.

[Exeunt....] Edd. Exeunt Lords. Ff. Exeunt Alcibiades, Lords, &c.
Capell.

SCENE VIII. Pope. SCENE VII. Johnson.

[1924] _What ... 'em._] As in Rowe. Prose in Ff.

[1925] _Serving of becks_] _Screwing of backs_ Hanmer (Theobald
conj.). _Serring of becks_ (from 'serrer' Fr.) Warburton.

[1926] _No ... music._] Prose in Ff. Nine lines of verse in Capell.

[1927] _thyself in paper_] _thyself in proper_ Theobald, ed. 2
(Warburton). _thyself in perpetuum_ Hanmer. _thyself. E'en pauper_ or
_thyself in pauper_ Becket conj.

[1928] _needs_] F1. _neede_ F2. _need_ F3 F4.

[1929] _an_] Capell. _and_ Ff. _if_ Pope.

_on society once_] _once on society_ Capell.

[1930] _So ... flattery!_] As in Ff. Four lines, ending _then ...
thee: ... be ... flattery,_ in Pope. Johnson ends the lines _So-- ...
then: ... lock ... be ... flattery._ Capell, _So; ... then, ... be ...
flattery._ Steevens, _So;-- ... lock ... be ... flattery._ Collier,
_now; ... thee ... be ... flattery._

[1931] _thou wilt_] _thou'lt_ Steevens (1793).

_me_] om. Steevens conj.

[1932] _thy_] _the_ Hanmer.

_heaven_] _haven_ Mason conj.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _A Senator's house._[1933]

          _Enter a_ Senator, _with papers in his hand_.[1934]

    _Sen._ And late five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore[1935]
    He owes nine thousand; besides my former sum,
    Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
    Of raging waste? It cannot hold; it will not.
    If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog                           5
    And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold:
    If I would sell my horse and buy twenty moe[1936]
    Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon;
    Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me straight[1937]
    And able horses: no porter at his gate,[1938]                     10
    But rather one that smiles and still invites[1939]
    All that pass by. It cannot hold; no reason[1940]
    Can found his state in safety. Caphis, ho![1941]
    Caphis, I say!

                            _Enter_ CAPHIS.

    _Caph._        Here, sir; what is your pleasure?

    _Sen._ Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon;            15
    Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased[1942]
    With slight denial; nor then silenced, when--[1943]
    'Commend me to your master'--and the cap[1943]
    Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,[1944]
    My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn                           20
    Out of mine own; his days and times are past,
    And my reliances on his fracted dates[1945][1946]
    Have smit my credit: I love and honour him,[1945]
    But must not break my back to heal his finger:
    Immediate are my needs; and my relief                             25
    Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,
    But find supply immediate. Get you gone:
    Put on a most importunate aspect,
    A visage of demand; for, I do fear,
    When every feather sticks in his own wing,                        30
    Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
    Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.[1947]

    _Caph._ I go, sir.

    _Sen._ 'I go, sir!' Take the bonds along with you,
    And have the dates in compt.

    _Caph._                      I will, sir.[1948]

    _Sen._                                    Go.[1949]      [_Exeunt._  35


SCENE II. _A hall in Timon's house._[1950]

         _Enter_ FLAVIUS, _with many bills in his hand_.[1951]

    _Flavius._ No care, no stop! so senseless of expense,
    That he will neither know how to maintain it,
    Nor cease his flow of riot: takes no account
    How things go from him; nor resumes no care[1952]
    Of what is to continue: never mind                                 5
    Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.[1953]
    What shall be done? he will not hear till feel:[1954]
    I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
    Fie, fie, fie, fie![1955]

     _Enter_ CAPHIS, _with the_ Servants _of_ ISIDORE _and_ VARRO.

    _Caph._ Good even, Varro: what, you come for money?[1956][1957]   10

    _Var. Serv._ Is't not your business too?[1957][1958]

    _Caph._ It is: and yours too, Isidore?[1957]

    _Isid. Serv._ It is so.[1957][1959]

    _Caph._ Would we were all discharged![1957]

    _Var. Serv._ I fear it.[1957]                                     15

    _Caph._ Here comes the lord.[1957][1960]

            _Enter_ TIMON, ALCIBIADES, Lords, _and others_.

    _Tim._ So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,
    My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?[1961]

    _Caph._ My lord, here is a note of certain dues.[1962]

    _Tim._ Dues! Whence are you?

    _Caph._                      Of Athens here, my lord.             20

    _Tim._ Go to my steward.

    _Caph._ Please it your lordship, he hath put me off
    To the succession of new days this month:
    My master is awaked by great occasion
    To call upon his own, and humbly prays you                        25
    That with your other noble parts you'll suit
    In giving him his right.

    _Tim._                   Mine honest friend,
    I prithee but repair to me next morning.

    _Caph._ Nay, good my lord,--

    _Tim._                       Contain thyself, good friend.[1963]

    _Var. Serv._ One Varro's servant, my good lord,--[1963][1964]     30

    _Isid. Serv._ From Isidore; he humbly prays your[1964][1965]
    speedy payment.[1964][1966]

    _Caph._ If you did know, my lord, my master's wants,--[1964][1967]

    _Var. Serv._ 'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks[1964]
    and past.[1964]                                                   35

    _Isid. Serv._ Your steward puts me off, my lord, and I[1968]
    Am sent expressly to your lordship.[1968]

    _Tim._ Give me breath.
    I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;
    I'll wait upon you instantly.       [_Exeunt Alcibiades, Lords, &c._
                           [_To Flav._] Come hither: pray you,[1969]  40
    How goes the world, that I am thus encounter'd
    With clamorous demands of date-broke bonds,[1970]
    And the detention of long-since-due debts,[1971]
    Against my honour?

    _Flav._            Please you, gentlemen,
    The time is unagreeable to this business:                         45
    Your importunacy cease till after dinner,[1972]
    That I may make his lordship understand
    Wherefore you are not paid.

    _Tim._ Do so, my friends. See them well entertain'd.[1973]  [_Exit._

    _Flav._ Pray, draw near.[1974]          [_Exit._                  50

                     _Enter_ APEMANTUS _and_ Fool.

    _Caph._ Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:[1975][1976]
    let's ha' some sport with 'em.[1976][1977]

    _Var. Serv._ Hang him, he'll abuse us.

    _Isid. Serv._ A plague upon him, dog!

    _Var. Serv._ How dost, fool?                                      55

    _Apem._ Dost dialogue with thy shadow?

    _Var. Serv._ I speak not to thee.

    _Apem._ No, 'tis to thyself. [_To the Fool_] Come away.[1978]

    _Isid. Serv._ There's the fool hangs on your back already.[1979]

    _Apem._ No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.[1980]   60

    _Caph._ Where's the fool now?[1981]

    _Apem._ He last asked the question. Poor rogues, and[1982][1983]
    usurers' men! bawds between gold and want![1983]

    _All Serv._ What are we, Apemantus?[1984]

    _Apem._ Asses.                                                    65

    _All Serv._ Why?[1984]

    _Apem._ That you ask me what you are, and do not
    know yourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.

    _Fool._ How do you, gentlemen?

    _All Serv._ Gramercies, good fool: how does your
        mistress?[1984][1985][1986]                                   70

    _Fool._ She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens[1986]
    as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!

    _Apem._ Good! gramercy.

                             _Enter_ Page.

    _Fool._ Look you, here comes my mistress' page.[1987]             75

    _Page._ [_To the Fool_] Why, how now, captain! what do[1988]
    you in this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?[1989][1990]

    _Apem._ Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might
    answer thee profitably.

    _Page._ Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription[1990][1991]  80
    of these letters: I know not which is which.

    _Apem._ Canst not read?

    _Page._ No.

    _Apem._ There will little learning die then, that day thou
    art hang'd. This is to Lord Timon; this to Alcibiades.            85
    Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thou'lt die a bawd.[1992]

    _Page._ Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish[1993]
    a dog's death. Answer not, I am gone.[1993]      [_Exit._

    _Apem._ E'en so thou outrun'st grace. Fool, I will go[1994]
    with you to Lord Timon's.[1994]                                   90

    _Fool._ Will you leave me there?[1994]

    _Apem._ If Timon stay at home. You three serve three[1994][1995]
    usurers?[1994]

    _All Serv._ Ay; would they served us![1984][1994][1996]

    _Apem._ So would I,--as good a trick as ever hangman[1994][1997]  95
    served thief.[1994]

    _Fool._ Are you three usurers' men?

    _All Serv._ Ay, fool.[1984]

    _Fool._ I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant:
    my mistress is one, and I am her fool. When men come to          100
    borrow of your masters, they approach sadly and go away
    merry; but they enter my mistress' house merrily and[1987][1998]
    go away sadly: the reason of this?

    _Var. Serv._ I could render one.

    _Apem._ Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster[1999]  105
    and a knave; which notwithstanding, thou shalt be
    no less esteemed.

    _Var. Serv._ What is a whoremaster, fool?

    _Fool._ A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
    'Tis a spirit: sometime 't appears like a lord; sometime
        like[2000]                                                   110
    a lawyer; sometime like a philosopher, with two stones[2001]
    moe than 's artificial one: he is very often like a knight;[2002]
    and, generally, in all shapes that man goes up and down in
    from fourscore to thirteen, this spirit walks in.

    _Var. Serv._ Thou art not altogether a fool.                     115

    _Fool._ Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery
    as I have, so much wit thou lack'st.

    _Apem._ That answer might have become Apemantus.

    _All Serv._ Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.[2003]

                    _Re-enter_ TIMON _and_ FLAVIUS.

    _Apem._ Come with me, fool, come.                                120

    _Fool._ I do not always follow lover, elder brother, and[2004]
    woman; sometime the philosopher.[2004][2005]

                                           [_Exeunt Apemantus and Fool._

    _Flav._ Pray you, walk near: I'll speak with you anon[2006]

                                               [_Exeunt Servants._[2007]

    _Tim._ You make me marvel; wherefore, ere this time,[2008]
    Had you not fully laid my state before me,                       125
    That I might so have rated my expense
    As I had leave of means?

    _Flav._                  You would not hear me,[2009]
    At many leisures I proposed.[2010]

    _Tim._                       Go to:
    Perchance some single vantages you took,
    When my indisposition put you back;                              130
    And that unaptness made your minister,[2011]
    Thus to excuse yourself.

    _Flav._                  O my good lord,
    At many times I brought in my accounts,
    Laid them before you; you would throw them off,[2012]
    And say, you found them in mine honesty.[2013]                   135
    When for some trifling present you have bid me
    Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;[2014]
    Yea, 'gainst the authority of manners pray'd you
    To hold your hand more close: I did endure
    Not seldom nor no slight checks, when I have                     140
    Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
    And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,[2015]
    Though you hear now, too late!--yet now's a time--[2016]
    The greatest of your having lacks a half[2017]
    To pay your present debts.[2017][2018]

    _Tim._                     Let all my land be sold.[2017]        145

    _Flav._ 'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone,
    And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
    Of present dues: the future comes apace:[2019]
    What shall defend the interim? and at length
    How goes our reckoning?[2020]                                    150

    _Tim._ To LacedÃ¦mon did my land extend.

    _Flav._ O my good lord, the world is but a word:[2021]
    Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
    How quickly were it gone!

    _Tim._                    You tell me true.

    _Flav._ If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,[2022]          155
    Call me before the exactest auditors,
    And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
    When all our offices have been oppress'd
    With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
    With drunken spilth of wine, when every room                     160
    Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy,
    I have retired me to a wasteful cock,[2023]
    And set mine eyes at flow.[2023]

    _Tim._                     Prithee, no more.

    _Flav._ Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
    How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants                  165
    This night englutted! Who is not Timon's?[2024]
    What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord Timon's?[2025]
    Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon![2026]
    Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
    The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:                  170
    Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,[2027]
    These flies are couch'd.

    _Tim._                   Come, sermon me no further:
    No villanous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart;[2028]
    Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
    Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,[2029]        175
    To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart;
    If I would broach the vessels of my love
    And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,[2030]
    Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use
    As I can bid thee speak.

    _Flav._                  Assurance bless your thoughts![2031]    180

    _Tim._ And in some sort these wants of mine are crown'd,
    That I account them blessings; for by these
    Shall I try friends: you shall perceive how you
    Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.[2032]
    Within there! Flaminius! Servilius![2033]                        185

       _Enter_ FLAMINIUS, SERVILIUS, _and other_ Servants.[2034]

    _Servants._ My lord? my lord?[2035]

    _Tim._ I will dispatch you severally: you to Lord Lucius:[2036]
    to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour[2036]
    to-day: you to Sempronius: commend me to their loves;[2036]
    and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have found time to[2036]  190
    use 'em toward a supply of money: let the request be fifty[2036][2037]
    talents.[2036]

    _Flam._ As you have said, my Lord.

    _Flav._ [_Aside_] Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum![2038]

    _Tim._ Go you, sir, to the senators--[2039]                      195
    Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have[2040]
    Deserved this hearing--bid 'em send o' the instant
    A thousand talents to me.

    _Flav._                   I have been bold,[2041]
    For that I knew it the most general way,
    To them to use your signet and your name,                        200
    But they do shake their heads, and I am here
    No richer in return.

    _Tim._               Is't true? can't be?

    _Flav._ They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
    That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot[2042]
    Do what they would; are sorry--you are honourable,--             205
    But yet they could have wish'd--they know not--[2043]
    Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
    May catch a wrench--would all were well--'tis pity:--
    And so, intending other serious matters,
    After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,                210
    With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods[2044]
    They froze me into silence.

    _Tim._                      You gods, reward them!
    Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows[2045]
    Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:[2046]
    Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;                215
    'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
    And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
    Is fashion'd for the journey, dull and heavy.
    [_To a Serv._] Go to Ventidius. [_To Flav._] Prithee, be not sad;[2047]
    Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak,[2048]             220
    No blame belongs to thee. [_To Serv._] Ventidius lately[2049]
    Buried his father, by whose death he's stepp'd
    Into a great estate: when he was poor,
    Imprison'd, and in scarcity of friends,
    I clear'd him with five talents: greet him from me;              225
    Bid him suppose some good necessity
    Touches his friend, which craves to be remember'd
    With those five talents. [_Exit Serv._] [_To Flav._] That had,
        give't these fellows[2050]
    To whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak or think[2051]
    That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.[2052]          230

    _Flav._ I would I could not think it: that thought is bounty's
        foe;[2053]
    Being free itself, it thinks all others so.               [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[1933] ACT II. SCENE I.] Rowe. om. Ff.

A Senator's house.] Capell, substantially. A publick Place in the City.
Rowe.

[1934] with ... hand.] Capell. om. Ff.

[1935] _thousand: to_] Ff. _thousand to_ Steevens.

[1936] _twenty_] Ff. _ten_ Pope. _twain_ Farmer conj. _two_ Singer conj.

_moe_] F1. _more_ F2 F3 F4.

[1937] _me_] _'em_ Malone conj.

[1938] _And able horses_] F1 F2. _An able horse_ F3 F4. _Ten able
horse_ Theobald. _Ten able horses_ Hanmer. _Ay, able horses_ Jackson
conj. _A stable o' horses_ Collier (Collier MS.). _Two able horses_
Singer conj.

_porter_] _grim porter_ Staunton conj.

_gate_] After this Johnson conjectures that a line is lost.

[1939] _rather one that_] _one that rathen_ Becket conj.

[1940] _by_] _by it_ Theobald.

[1941] _found ... in_] Hanmer. _sound ... in_ Ff. _found ... on_
Capell. _find ... in_ Capell conj.

[1942] _my_] om. Pope.

[1943] _when--'Commend_] _when Commend_ F1. _then Commend_ F2 F3 F4.
_with--Commend_ Rowe.

[1944] _Plays_] _Play'ng_ Hanmer.

_hand, thus: but_] Ff. _hand,--thus but_ Pope.

_him_] F1. _him sirrah_ F2 F3 F4.

[1945] _reliances ... Have_] _reliance ... Has_ Pope.

[1946] _on his_] _on's_ S. Walker conj.

[1947] _Which_] _Who_ Pope.

[1948] _'I go, sir!'_] _I go sir?_ F1. _I goe sir?_ F2 F3. _I go,
sir?_ F4. _Ay, go, sir:_ Pope. Omitted by Dyce and Staunton.

_I ... you_,] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[1949] _in compt._] Theobald. _in. Come._ Ff. _in count._ Hanmer.

[1950] SCENE II.] Rowe. om. Ff.

A hall....] Timon's Hall. Rowe.

[1951] Flavius,] Rowe. Steward, Ff (and elsewhere).

[1952] _nor resumes_] Rowe. _nor resume_ Ff. _and resumes_ Pope. _no
reserve_, Collier MS. _no reserves_, Collier (ed. 2).

[1953] _Was to be_] _Was, to be_ Hanmer. _Was made to be_ Heath conj.
_Was_ Long MS. _Was formed_ Mason conj. _Was truly_ Singer MS. _Was
surely_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[1954] _hear_] _here_ F2.

_feel_] _he feel_ Keightley.

[1955] Enter....] Johnson. Enter Caphis, Isidore, and Varro. Ff.

[1956] _Good even, Varro_] _Good evening, Varro_ Rowe (ed. 2). _Good,
even Varro_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. Vol. LX. p. 127).

_money?_] _money._ Pope (ed. 2).

[1957] _Good ... lord._] As in Ff. As verse in Capell, ending line 10
at _what_.

[1958] Var. Serv.] Malone. Var. Ff (and throughout the scene).

[1959] Isid. Serv.] Malone. Isid. Ff (and throughout the scene).

[1960] Enter....] Capell, substantially. Enter Timon, and his Traine.
Ff.

[1961] _With me? what is_] Capell. _With me, what is_ Ff. _Well what's_
Pope.

[1962] [They present their Bills. Rowe.

[1963] _lord,--_] _lord--_ Rowe. _lord._ Ff.

[1964] _One ... past._] Prose in Ff. Verse in Capell.

[1965] _humbly_] om. Pope, reading _From ... payment_, as one line.

_your_] _your lordship's_ Steevens conj. _you_ S. Walker conj.

[1966] _payment_] _payment of_ Keightley.

[1967] _wants,--_] _wants--_ Rowe. _wants._ Ff.

[1968] _Your ... lordship._] As in Ff. Malone ends line 36 at _lord_.

[1969] [Exeunt....] Capell. Exe. Lords. Rowe. om. Ff.

[To Flav.] Johnson.

_pray you_] om. Pope.

[1970] _demands_] _claims_ Pope.

_date-broke_] Steevens (1793). _date-broken_ Malone. _debt, broken_,
Ff. _debt, of broken_ Pope. _broken_ Hanmer.

[1971] _detention of_] F1. _detention_ F2. _detention_, F3 F4.

[1972] _importunacy_] _importunity_ Pope.

[1973] _Do ... entertain'd_] As in Ff.

[Exit.] Exit Tim. Pope. om. Ff.

[1974] _Pray_] _Pray you_ Capell, reading _Wherefore ... near_ as two
lines, the first ending _friends. I pray_ Steevens (1793), following
Capell's arrangement.

[1975] SCENE III. Pope. Johnson conjectures that a scene is lost here.

[1976] _Stay ... 'em_,] Prose in Ff. Verse by Steevens (Capell conj.
MS.).

[1977] _ha'_] _ha_ F1 F2 F3. _have_ F4.

[1978] [To the Fool] Steevens. om. Ff.

[1979] [To Var. Steevens. om. Ff.

[1980] _thou'rt_] Collier. _th' art_ F1. _thou art_ F2 F3 F4.

_him_] Ff. _it_ Hanmer.

[1981] _Where's_] _Who's_ Lettsom conj.

[1982] _He_] _He that_ S. Walker conj.

_rogues_] _rogues'_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[1983] _Poor ... want!_] Transferred to follow _yourselves_, line 75,
Johnson conj.

[1984] All Serv.] All. Ff.

[1985] _Gramercies_] _Gramercy_ Hanmer.

[1986] _Gramercies ... mistress?_] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[1987] _mistress'_] _mistress's_ Theobald. _masters_ F1 F2 F3.
_master's_ F4.

[1988] [To the Fool] Johnson. om. Ff.

[1989] _wise_] _wife_ F2.

[1990] _Apemantus_] F4. _Apermantus_ F1 F2 F3.

[1991] Page.] F4. Boy. F1 F2 F3.

[1992] _thou'lt_] F4. _thou't_ F1 F2 F3.

[1993] _famish a_] _famish, a_ Rowe.

[1994] See note (VIII).

[1995] _home._] _home--_ Pope.

[1996] _Ay; would_] Capell. _I would_ Ff.

[1997] _I,--as_] _I--as_ Rowe. _I: As_ Ff.

[1998] _merry_] F1 F2. _merrily_ F3 F4.

[1999] Apem.] Fool. Hanmer.

[2000] _sometime 't_] F3 F4. _sometime t'_ F1 F2. _sometime it_ Pope.
_sometimes it_ Theobald.

_sometime_] _sometimes_ F4.

[2001] _sometime_] _sometimes_ Pope.

[2002] _moe_] F1. _more_ F2 F3 F4.

[2003] Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter ... Ff.

[2004] _I ... philosopher_] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_brother_, in Ff.

[2005] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt Fool and Apemantus. Capell. om. Ff.

[2006] _Pray you ... anon._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[2007] [Exeunt Servants.] Capell. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt Creditors,
Apemantus, and Fool. Theobald.

[2008] SCENE IV. Pope.

_marvel; wherefore_] Rowe. _mervell wherefore_ F1 F2. _marvel
wherefore_ F3 F4.

[2009] _me_,] Capell. _me_: Ff.

[2010] _proposed_] _propos'd_ F2 F3 F4. _propose_ F1.

[2011] _your_] F1. _you_ F2 F3 F4.

[2012] _you; you_] Rowe. _you, you_ Ff.

[2013] _found_] _sound_ F1.

[2014] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[2015] _loved_] _lov'd_ F1. _deare lov'd_ F2. _dear lov'd_ F3 F4.
_belov'd_ S. Walker conj.

[2016] _hear_] _heare_ F1. _here_ F2 F3 F4.

_too ... time_] _yet now's too late a time_ Hanmer. _yet now's a time
too late_ Collier MS.

[2017] _The ... To pay your_] _Your greatest having lacks a half to
pay Your_ Steevens conj.

[2018] _your_] _you_ F2.

[2019] _comes_] _come_ Hanmer.

[2020] _How goes_] _Make good_ Hanmer. _Hold good_ Warburton.

[2021] _world is but a word_] _world's but as a word_ Becket conj.

_word_] F1. _world_ F2 F3 F4.

[2022] _or falsehood_] _or truth_ Seymour conj. _of falsehood_ Edd.
conj.

[2023] _retired ... cock, And_] _retir'd me, and like a wasteful
cock, Have_ Anon. apud Rann. conj. _retired me, like a wasteful cock,
And_ Mitford conj. _retir'd (me too a wasteful cock,) And_ Staunton
conj.

_to_] _from_ Knight conj.

_wasteful cock_] _lonely room_ Pope. _wasteful nook_ Collier (Collier
MS.). _wakeful cock_ Jackson conj. _wakeful couch_ Jervis conj.

[2024] _Who_] _who now_ Pope.

_Timon's_] _lord Timon's_ Steevens conj.

[2025] _Lord_] Rowe. _L._ Ff.

[2026] _Timon ... Timon_] F1. _Timon ... Timons_ F2 F3. _Timon ...
Timon's_ F4. _Timon's ... Timon's_ Hanmer.

[2027] _Feast-won_] Pope. _Feast won_ Ff. _Fast won_ Becket conj.

_fast-lost_] Theobald. _fast lost_ Ff.

[2028] _heart_] _hand_ or _hands_ S. Walker conj.

[2029] _the_] _all_ Hanmer.

[2030] _argument_] _arguments_ Rowe.

[2031] _I can_] om. Steevens conj.

[2032] _Mistake ... friends_] As in Capell. One line in Pope, reading
_in my friends I'm wealthy._ In Ff _Shall ... friends_ is printed
as three lines, ending _perceive ... fortunes ... friends._

_I am_] _I'm_ Johnson.

[2033] _Flaminius_] Rowe. _Flavius_ Ff. _Ho Flaminius_ Pope.

[2034] Enter ...] Rowe. Enter three Servants. Ff.

[2035] SCENE V. Pope.

[2036] _I will ... talents._] Prose in Ff. Seven lines of verse in
Capell.

[2037] _'em_] _them_ Capell.

[2038] [Aside] First marked by Capell. om. Ff.

_Lucullus_] _lord Lucullus_ Steevens (1793).

[2039] [To Flavius. Rowe. To another Serv. Malone (Capell conj.).

_senators_] _senators of Athens_ Steevens conj.

[2040] _health_,] F3 F4. _health_; F1. _health?_ F2.

[2041] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[2042] _treasure_] _Treature_ F1.

[2043] _not--_] _not--but_ Hanmer. _not, but_ Capell. _not what--_
Dyce (ed. 2).

[2044] _cold-moving_] Theobald. _cold moving_ Ff.

[2045] _Prithee_] _I pr'ythee_ Pope.

[2046] _in them_] om. Hanmer.

[2047] [To a Serv.] Malone (Capell conj.). om. Ff.

[To Flav.] Malone. om. Ff.

[2048] _Thou art_] _Thou'rt_ Pope.

_honest_] _just_ Pope.

_ingeniously_] _ingenuously_ F4.

[2049] [To Serv.] Malone. om. Ff.

[2050] [Exit Serv.] Edd. (Globe ed.). om. Ff.

[To Flav.] Malone. om. Ff.

_give't_] _give it_ Steevens.

[2051] _Ne'er_] _Nev'r_ Ff.

[2052] _'mong_] _'mongst_ Boswell.

[2053] _I would ... think it_] _Would I could not_ Pope. _I would, I
could not_ Steevens conj.

_thought is_] _thought's_ Steevens conj.

_I would ... foe_] One line in Capell. Two in Ff.

_foe_;] _foe?_ F2.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _A room in Lucullus's house._[2054]

          FLAMINIUS _waiting. Enter a_ Servant _to him_.[2055]

    _Serv._ I have told my lord of you; he is coming down
    to you.[2056]

    _Flam._ I thank you, sir.

                           _Enter_ LUCULLUS.

    _Serv._ Here's my lord.

    _Lucul._ [_Aside_] One of Lord Timon's men? a gift, I[2057]        5
    warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver basin
    and ewer to-night. Flaminius, honest Flaminius; you are[2058]
    very respectively welcome, sir. Fill me some wine.[2058]     [_Exit_
    _Servant._] And how does that honourable, complete, freehearted
    gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord                 10
    and master?

    _Flam._ His health is well, sir.

    _Lucul._ I am right glad that his health is well, sir: and
    what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?

    _Flam._ Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in           15
    my lord's behalf, I come to entreat your honour to supply;
    who, having great and instant occasion to use fifty talents,[2059]
    hath sent to your lordship to furnish him, nothing doubting
    your present assistance therein.

    _Lucul._ La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas,       20
    good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not keep so
    good a house. Many a time and often I ha' dined with[2060]
    him, and told him on't; and come again to supper to him,
    of purpose to have him spend less; and yet he would[2061]
    embrace no counsel, take no warning by my coming.                 25
    Every man has his fault, and honesty is his: I ha' told him[2062]
    on't, but I could ne'er get him from 't.[2063]

                    _Re-enter_ Servant, _with wine_.

    _Serv._ Please your lordship, here is the wine.

    _Lucul._ Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
    Here's to thee.[2064]                                             30

    _Flam._ Your lordship speaks your pleasure.

    _Lucul._ I have observed thee always for a towardly
    prompt spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows
    what belongs to reason; and canst use the time well, if the
    time use thee well: good parts in thee. [_To Serv._] Get[2065]    35
    you gone, sirrah. [_Exit Serv._] Draw nearer, honest Flaminius.[2066]
    Thy lord's a bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise;
    and thou knowest well enough, although thou comest to
    me, that this is no time to lend money, especially upon
    bare friendship, without security. Here's three solidares         40
    for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say thou saw'st me
    not. Fare thee well.

    _Flam._ Is't possible the world should so much differ,
    And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
    To him that worships thee!    [_Throwing back the money._[2067]   45

    _Lucul._ Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy
    master.                  [_Exit._[2068]

    _Flam._ May these add to the number that may scald thee!
    Let molten coin be thy damnation,[2069]
    Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!                        50
    Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
    It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
    I feel my master's passion! this slave,[2070]
    Unto his honour, has my lord's meat in him:[2070]
    Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,[2071]                 55
    When he is turn'd to poison?
    O, may diseases only work upon't![2072]
    And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature[2073]
    Which my lord paid for, be of any power[2073][2074]
    To expel sickness, but prolong his hour![2075]      [_Exit._      60


SCENE II. _A public place._[2076]

                _Enter_ LUCIUS, _with three_ Strangers.

    _Luc._ Who, the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend,
    and an honourable gentleman.

    _First Stran._ We know him for no less, though we are[2077]
    but strangers to him. But I can tell you one thing, my
    lord, and which I hear from common rumours: now Lord               5
    Timon's happy hours are done and past, and his estate
    shrinks from him.

    _Luc._ Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.[2078]

    _Sec. Stran._ But believe you this, my lord, that not long[2079]
    ago one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow           10
    so many talents; nay, urged extremely for't, and showed[2080]
    what necessity belonged to't, and yet was denied.

    _Luc._ How!

    _Sec. Stran._ I tell you, denied, my lord.

    _Luc._ What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,        15
    I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man! there was
    very little honour showed in't. For my own part, I must[2081]
    needs confess, I have received some small kindnesses from
    him, as money, plate, jewels, and such-like trifles, nothing
    comparing to his; yet, had he mistook him and sent to me,[2082]   20
    I should ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.[2083]

                           _Enter_ SERVILIUS.

    _Ser._ See, by good hap, yonder's my lord; I have sweat
    to see his honour. My honoured lord![2084]

    _Luc._ Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee[2085]
    well: commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my[2085]        25
    very exquisite friend.[2086]

    _Ser._ May it please your honour, my lord hath sent--

    _Luc._ Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to[2087]
    that lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thank him, think'st
    thou? And what has he sent now?                                   30

    _Ser._ Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;[2088]
    requesting your lordship to supply his instant use with so[2089]
    many talents.[2089]

    _Luc._ I know his lordship is but merry with me;
    He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.[2090]                  35

    _Ser._ But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
    If his occasion were not virtuous,
    I should not urge it half so faithfully.[2091]

    _Luc._ Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?

    _Ser._ Upon my soul, 'tis true, sir.                              40

    _Luc._ What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
    against such a good time, when I might ha' shown myself[2092]
    honourable! how unluckily it happened, that I should purchase
    the day before for a little part, and undo a great deal[2093]
    of honour! Servilius, now, before the gods, I am not able         45
    to do--the more beast, I say:--I was sending to use Lord[2094]
    Timon myself, these gentlemen can witness; but I would
    not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now. Commend
    me bountifully to his good lordship; and I hope his
    honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I have no         50
    power to be kind: and tell him this from me, I count it
    one of my greatest afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure[2095]
    such an honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you
    befriend me so far as to use mine own words to him?[2096]

    _Ser._ Yes, sir, I shall.                                         55

    _Luc._ I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.[2097]

                                                      [_Exit Servilius_.

    True, as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;
    And he that's once denied will hardly speed.                [_Exit._

    _First Stran._ Do you observe this, Hostilius?[2098]

    _Sec. Stran._                                   Ay, too well.

    _First Stran._ Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the same
        piece[2099][2100]                                             60
    Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him[2099][2100]
    His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in[2099]
    My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,[2099]
    And kept his credit with his purse;[2099][2101]
    Supported his estate; nay, Timon's money                          65
    Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks,
    But Timon's silver treads upon his lip;
    And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man[2102][2103]
    When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--[2103]
    He does deny him, in respect of his,                              70
    What charitable men afford to beggars.

    _Third Stran._ Religion groans at it.

    _First Stran._                        For mine own part,[2104]
    I never tasted Timon in my life,[2104]
    Nor came any of his bounties over me,[2105]
    To mark me for his friend; yet, I protest,                        75
    For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,
    And honourable carriage,[2106]
    Had his necessity made use of me,
    I would have put my wealth into donation,[2107]
    And the best half should have return'd to him,[2108][2109]        80
    So much I love his heart: but, I perceive,[2109]
    Men must learn now with pity to dispense;
    For policy sits above conscience.[2110]        [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A room in Sempronius' house._[2111]

        _Enter_ SEMPRONIUS, _and a_ Servant _of_ TIMON'S.[2112]

    _Sem._ Must he needs trouble me in 't,--hum!--'bove all others?[2113]
    He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
    And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
    Whom he redeem'd from prison: all these
    Owe their estates unto him.[2114]

    _Serv._                     My lord,[2115][2116]                   5
    They have all been touch'd and found base metal, for[2116][2117][2118]
    They have all denied him.[2116][2118][2119]

    _Sem._                    How! have they denied him?
    Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?[2120]
    And does he send to me? Three? hum!
    It shows but little love or judgement in him:[2121]               10
    Must I be his last refuge? His friends, like physicians,[2122][2123]
    Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?[2122][2124]
    Has much disgraced me in 't; I'm angry at him,[2125]
    That might have known my place: I see no sense for 't,[2126]
    But his occasions might have woo'd me first;                      15
    For, in my conscience, I was the first man
    That e'er received gift from him:[2127]
    And does he think so backwardly of me now,[2128]
    That I'll requite it last? No:[2129]
    So it may prove an argument of laughter                           20
    To the rest, and 'mongst lords I be thought a fool.[2130]
    I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum,[2131]
    Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;[2132]
    I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,[2133]
    And with their faint reply this answer join;                      25
    Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.               [_Exit._

    _Serv._ Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The[2134]
    devil knew not what he did when he made man politic; he[2134][2135]
    crossed himself by 't: and I cannot think but in the end
        the[2134][2136]
    villanies of man will set him clear. How fairly this
        lord[2134][2137]                                              30
    strives to appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked;[2134][2138]
    like those that under hot ardent zeal would set whole[2134][2139]
    realms on fire:[2134]
    Of such a nature is his politic love.[2140]
    This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled,[2141]             35
    Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,[2142]
    Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
    Many a bounteous year, must be employ'd
    Now to guard sure their master.
    And this is all a liberal course allows;                          40
    Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.             [_Exit._


SCENE IV. _A hall in Timon's house._[2143]

     _Enter two Servants of_ VARRO, _and the_ Servant _of_ LUCIUS,
     _meeting_ TITUS, HORTENSIUS, _and other_ Servants _of Timon's
              creditors, waiting his coming out._[2144]

    _First Var. Serv._ Well met; good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.[2145]

    _Tit._ The like to you, kind Varro.[2146]

    _Hor._                              Lucius![2146]
    What, do we meet together?[2146][2147]

    _Luc. Serv._               Ay, and I think[2146]
    One business does command us all; for mine[2146]
    Is money.[2146][2148]                                              5

    _Tit._ So is theirs and ours.[2148][2149]

                           _Enter_ PHILOTUS.

    _Luc. Serv._                And Sir Philotus too![2148]

    _Phi._ Good day at once.

    _Luc. Serv._             Welcome, good brother.[2150]
    What do you think the hour?[2150][2151]

    _Phi._                      Labouring for nine.

    _Luc. Serv._ So much?

    _Phi._                Is not my lord seen yet?

    _Luc. Serv._                                   Not yet.

    _Phi._ I wonder on't; he was wont to shine at seven.[2152]        10

    _Luc. Serv._ Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him:[2153]
    You must consider that a prodigal course[2154]
    Is like the sun's; but not, like his, recoverable.[2155]
    I fear[2155]
    'Tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse;[2156]                  15
    That is, one may reach deep enough and yet[2156]
    Find little.[2156]

    _Phi._       I am of your fear for that.

    _Tit._ I'll show you how to observe a strange event.
    Your lord sends now for money.

    _Hor._                         Most true, he does.[2157]

    _Tit._ And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,                   20
    For which I wait for money.[2158]

    _Hor._ It is against my heart.[2159]

    _Luc. Serv._                   Mark, how strange it shows,
    Timon in this should pay more than he owes:
    And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels,
    And send for money for 'em.                                       25

    _Hor._ I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness:[2160]
    I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
    And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.[2161]

    _First Var. Serv._ Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's
        yours?[2162]

    _Luc. Serv._ Five thousand mine.[2163]                            30

    _First Var. Serv._ 'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sum[2164]
    Your master's confidence was above mine;
    Else, surely, his had equall'd.[2165]

                           _Enter_ FLAMINIUS.

    _Tit._ One of Lord Timon's men.

    _Luc. Serv._ Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord[2166]       35
    ready to come forth?[2166]

    _Flam._ No, indeed he is not.

    _Tit._ We attend his lordship: pray, signify so much.

    _Flam._ I need not tell him that; he knows you are too[2167]
    diligent.[2167][2168]                  [_Exit._                   40

              _Enter_ FLAVIUS _in a cloak, muffled_.[2169]

    _Luc. Serv._ Ha! is not that his steward muffled so?
    He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.

    _Tit._ Do you hear, sir?

    _Sec. Var. Serv._ By your leave, sir,--[2170]

    _Flav._ What do ye ask of me, my friend?[2171]                    45

    _Tit._ We wait for certain money here, sir.[2172]

    _Flav._                                     Ay,
    If money were as certain as your waiting,
    'Twere sure enough.[2173]
    Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills,[2173]
    When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?[2173][2174]        50
    Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts[2173][2175]
    And take down the interest into their gluttonous maws.[2173][2176]
    You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;[2173]
    Let me pass quietly:[2173]
    Believe't, my lord and I have made an end;                        55
    I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

    _Luc. Serv._ Ay, but this answer will not serve.

    _Flav._ If 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you;[2177]
    For you serve knaves.            [_Exit._[2178]

    _First Var. Serv._ How! what does his cashiered worship[2179]     60
    mutter?

    _Sec. Var. Serv._ No matter what; he's poor, and that's[2180]
    revenge enough. Who can speak broader than he that has
    no house to put his head in? such may rail against great[2181]
    buildings.                                                        65

                           _Enter_ SERVILIUS.

    _Tit._ O, here's Servilius; now we shall know some answer.[2182][2183]

    _Ser._ If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some[2182][2184]
    other hour, I should derive much from 't; for, take't of my[2182][2185]
    soul, my lord leans wondrously to discontent: his comfortable[2182]  70
    temper has forsook him; he's much out of health and[2182][2186]
    keeps his chamber.[2182]

    _Luc. Serv._ Many do keep their chambers are not sick:
    And if it be so far beyond his health,[2187]
    Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,                      75
    And make a clear way to the gods.

    _Ser._                            Good gods!

    _Tit._ We cannot take this for answer, sir.[2188]

    _Flam._ [_Within_] Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!

        _Enter_ TIMON _in a rage_; FLAMINIUS _following_.[2189]

    _Tim._ What, are my doors opposed against my passage?[2190]
    Have I been ever free, and must my house                          80
    Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?[2191]
    The place which I have feasted, does it now,
    Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?

    _Luc. Serv._ Put in now, Titus.[2192]

    _Tit._ My lord, here is my bill.[2192][2193]                      85

    _Luc. Serv._ Here's mine.[2192]

    _Hor._ And mine, my lord.[2192][2194]

    _Both Var. Serv._ And ours, my lord.[2192][2195]

    _Phi._ All our bills.[2192][2196]

    _Tim._ Knock me down with 'em: cleave me to the girdle.[2192]     90

    _Luc. Serv._ Alas, my lord,--[2192][2197]

    _Tim._ Cut my heart in sums.[2192][2198]

    _Tit._ Mine, fifty talents.[2192]

    _Tim._ Tell out my blood.[2192]

    _Luc. Serv._ Five thousand crowns, my lord.[2192]                 95

    _Tim._ Five thousand drops pays that. What
        yours?--and[2192][2199][2200]
    yours?[2192][2199]

    _First Var. Serv._ My lord,--[2192][2201][2202]

    _Sec. Var. Serv._ My lord,--[2192][2202][2203]

    _Tim._ Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you![2204]

                                                          [_Exit._   100

    _Hor._ Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their
    caps at their money: these debts may well be called desperate
    ones, for a madman owes 'em.                              [_Exeunt._

                 _Re-enter_ TIMON _and_ FLAVIUS.[2205]

    _Tim._ They have e'en put my breath from me, the
    slaves. Creditors? devils!                                       105

    _Flav._ My dear lord,--[2206]

    _Tim._ What if it should be so?

    _Flav._ My lord,--[2206][2207]

    _Tim._ I'll have it so. My steward!

    _Flav._ Here, my lord.                                           110

    _Tim._ So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,
    Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius: all:[2208]
    I'll once more feast the rascals.

    _Flav._                           O my lord,[2209]
    You only speak from your distracted soul;[2209]
    There is not so much left, to furnish out[2209][2210]            115
    A moderate table.[2209][2211]

    _Tim._            Be it not in thy care;
    Go,[2212]
    I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tide[2213]
    Of knaves once more; my cook and I'll provide.            [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _The Senate-house._[2214]

                      _The Senate sitting._[2215]

    _First Sen._ My lord, you have my voice to it; the fault's[2216][2217]
    Bloody; 'tis necessary he should die:[2216]
    Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

    _Sec. Sen._ Most true; the law shall bruise him.[2218]

                    _Enter_ ALCIBIADES, _attended_.

    _Alcib._ Honour, health, and compassion to the senate![2219]       5

    _First Sen._ Now, captain?[2220]

    _Alcib._ I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
    For pity is the virtue of the law,
    And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
    It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy                          10
    Upon a friend of mine, who in hot blood
    Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth
    To those that without heed do plunge into 't.
    He is a man, setting his fate aside,[2221][2222]
    Of comely virtues:[2222][2223]                                    15
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--[2222][2223]
    An honour in him which buys out his fault--[2222][2223]
    But with a noble fury and fair spirit,[2222][2223][2224]
    Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,[2223][2225]
    He did oppose his foe:[2223]                                      20
    And with such sober and unnoted passion[2226]
    He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,[2227]
    As if he had but proved an argument.[2228]

    _First Sen._ You undergo too strict a paradox,
    Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:                          25
    Your words have took such pains, as if they labour'd[2229]
    To bring manslaughter into form, and set quarrelling[2230][2231]
    Upon the head of valour; which indeed[2230]
    Is valour misbegot and came into the world[2230]
    When sects and factions were newly born:[2230][2232]              30
    He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
    The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs[2233]
    His outsides, to wear them like his raiment, carelessly,[2233][2234]
    And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,[2235]
    To bring it into danger.                                          35
    If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
    What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!

    _Alcib._ My lord,--

    _First Sen._        You cannot make gross sins look clear:[2236]
    To revenge is no valour, but to bear.[2237]

    _Alcib._ My lords, then, under favour, pardon me,                 40
    If I speak like a captain.
    Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
    And not endure all threats? sleep upon 't,[2238]
    And let the foes quietly cut their throats,[2239]
    Without repugnancy? If there be[2240]                             45
    Such valour in the bearing, what make we[2241]
    Abroad? why then women are more valiant[2242]
    That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
    And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon[2243]
    Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,[2243]                     50
    If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,[2243]
    As you are great, be pitifully good:
    Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
    To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;
    But in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.[2244]                   55
    To be in anger is impiety;
    But who is man that is not angry?
    Weigh but the crime with this.

    _Sec. Sen._ You breathe in vain.

    _Alcib._                         In vain! His service done[2245][2246]
    At LacedÃ¦mon and Byzantium[2246]                                  60
    Were a sufficient briber for his life.

    _First Sen._ What's that?

    _Alcib._                  I say, my lords, has done fair service,[2247]
    And slain in fight many of your enemies:[2248]
    How full of valour did he bear himself
    In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!                  65

    _Sec. Sen._ He has made too much plenty with 'em;[2249][2250]
    He's a sworn rioter: he has a sin[2250][2251][2252]
    That often drowns him and takes his valour prisoner:[2252][2253]
    If there were no foes, that were enough[2254]
    To overcome him: in that beastly fury                             70
    He has been known to commit outrages
    And cherish factions: 'tis inferr'd to us,
    His days are foul and his drink dangerous.

    _First Sen._ He dies.

    _Alcib._              Hard fate! he might have died in war.
    My lords, if not for any parts in him--                           75
    Though his right arm might purchase his own time
    And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
    Take my deserts to his and join 'em both:
    And, for I know your reverend ages love[2255]
    Security, I'll pawn my victories, all[2255][2256]                 80
    My honours to you, upon his good returns.[2255][2257]
    If by this crime he owes the law his life,
    Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore;[2258]
    For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

    _First Sen._ We are for law: he dies; urge it no more,            85
    On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,
    He forfeits his own blood that spills another.

    _Alcib._ Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,[2259]
    I do beseech you, know me.[2259]

    _Sec. Sen._ How!                                                  90

    _Alcib._ Call me to your remembrances.[2260]

    _Third Sen._ What![2261]

    _Alcib._ I cannot think but your age has forgot me;[2262]
    It could not else be I should prove so base
    To sue and be denied such common grace:                           95
    My wounds ache at you.

    _First Sen._           Do you dare our anger?[2263]
    'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;
    We banish thee for ever.

    _Alcib._                 Banish me!
    Banish your dotage; banish usury,
    That makes the senate ugly.                                      100

    _First Sen._ If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,[2264]
    Attend our weightier judgement. And, not to swell our
        spirit,[2265][2266][2267]
    He shall be executed presently.[2266][2268]         [_Exeunt Senators._

    _Alcib._ Now the gods keep you old enough, that you may live[2269]
    Only in bone, that none may look on you![2270]                   105
    I'm worse than mad: I have kept back their foes,
    While they have told their money and let out
    Their coin upon large interest, I myself
    Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
    Is this the balsam that the usuring senate                       110
    Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment![2271]
    It comes not ill; I hate not to be banish'd;
    It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
    That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
    My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.[2272]                115
    'Tis honour with most lands to be at odds;[2273]
    Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.[2274]       [_Exit._


SCENE VI. _A banqueting-room in Timon's house._[2275]

   _Music. Tables set out_: Servants _attending. Enter divers_ Lords,
             Senators _and others, at several doors_.[2276]

    _First Lord._ The good time of day to you, sir.[2277]

    _Sec. Lord._ I also wish it to you. I think this honourable[2278]
    lord did but try us this other day.

    _First Lord._ Upon that were my thoughts tiring when[2279]
    we encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as he             5
    made it seem in the trial of his several friends.

    _Sec. Lord._ It should not be, by the persuasion of his
    new feasting.

    _First Lord._ I should think so: he hath sent me an
    earnest inviting, which many my near occasions did urge           10
    me to put off; but he hath conjured me beyond them, and
    I must needs appear.

    _Sec. Lord._ In like manner was I in debt to my importunate
    business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am
    sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my provision            15
    was out.

    _First Lord._ I am sick of that grief too, as I understand
    how all things go.

    _Sec. Lord._ Every man here's so. What would he have[2280]
    borrowed of you?                                                  20

    _First Lord._ A thousand pieces.

    _Sec. Lord._ A thousand pieces!

    _First Lord._ What of you?

    _Sec. Lord._ He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes.[2281]

                    _Enter_ TIMON _and_ Attendants.

    _Tim_. With all my heart, gentlemen both: and how                 25
    fare you?

    _First Lord._ Ever at the best, hearing well of your
    lordship.

    _Sec. Lord._ The swallow follows not summer more willing[2282][2283]
    than we your lordship.[2282]                                      30

    _Tim._ [_Aside_] Nor more willingly leaves winter; such[2284]
    summer-birds are men.--Gentlemen, our dinner will not recompense[2284]
    this long stay: feast your ears with the music
    awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the trumpet's sound;[2285]
    we shall to 't presently.                                         35

    _First Lord._ I hope it remains not unkindly with your
    lordship, that I returned you an empty messenger.

    _Tim._ O, sir, let it not trouble you.

    _Sec. Lord._ My noble lord,--[2286]

    _Tim._ Ah, my good friend, what cheer?                            40

    _Sec. Lord._ My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of[2287]
    shame, that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,[2288]
    I was so unfortunate a beggar.

    _Tim._ Think not on 't, sir.

    _Sec. Lord._ If you had sent but two hours before--[2289]         45

    _Tim._ Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
    [_The banquet brought in._] Come, bring in all together.[2290]

    _Sec. Lord._ All covered dishes!

    _First Lord._ Royal cheer, I warrant you.

    _Third Lord._ Doubt not that, if money and the season[2291]       50
    can yield it.

    _First Lord._ How do you? What's the news?

    _Third Lord._ Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?[2292]

    _First and Sec. Lord._ Alcibiades banished![2293]

    _Third Lord._'Tis so, be sure of it.                              55

    _First Lord._ How? how?

    _Sec. Lord._ I pray you, upon what?

    _Tim._ My worthy friends, will you draw near?

    _Third Lord._ I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble[2294]
    feast toward.                                                     60

    _Sec. Lord._ This is the old man still.

    _Third Lord._ Will 't hold? will 't hold?[2295]

    _Sec. Lord._ It does: but time will--and so--[2296]

    _Third Lord._ I do conceive.

    _Tim._ Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would          65
    to the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all places
    alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool ere
    we can agree upon the first place: sit, sit. The gods require[2297]
    our thanks.

    You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with
        thankfulness.[2298]                                           70
    For your own gifts, make yourselves praised: but[2298]
    reserve still to give, lest your deities be despised. Lend to[2298]
    each man enough, that one need not lend to another; for,[2298]
    were your godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake[2298]
    the gods. Make the meat be beloved more than the man[2298][2299]  75
    that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without a score[2298]
    of villains: if there sit twelve women at the table, let a[2298]
    dozen of them be--as they are. The rest of your fees, O[2298][2300]
    gods,--the senators of Athens, together with the common[2298]
    lag of people,--what is amiss in them, you gods, make[2298][2301]  80
    suitable for destruction. For these my present friends,[2298][2302]
    as they are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to[2298][2303]
    nothing are they welcome.[2298][2304]

    Uncover, dogs, and lap.

                  [_The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of warm
                                                           water._[2305]

    _Some speak._ What does his lordship mean?                        85

    _Some other._ I know not.

    _Tim._ May you a better feast never behold,
    You knot of mouth-friends! smoke and luke-warm water[2306]
    Is your perfection. This is Timon's last;[2307]
    Who stuck and spangled you with flatteries,[2308]                 90
    Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces[2309]
    Your reeking villany.     [_Throwing the water in their faces._[2310]
              Live loathed, and long,
    Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
    Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
    You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,[2311]       95
    Cap-and-knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks![2312]
    Of man and beast the infinite malady[2313]
    Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?
    Soft! take thy physic first--thou too--and thou:--
    Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.[2314]                 100

                      [_Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out._

    What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,
    Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
    Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be
    Of Timon man and all humanity!                              [_Exit._

               _Re-enter the_ Lords, Senators, &c.[2315]

    _First Lord._ How now, my lords!                                 105

    _Sec. Lord._ Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?

    _Third Lord._ Push! did you see my cap?[2316]

    _Fourth Lord._ I have lost my gown.[2317]

    _First Lord._ He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour[2318][2319]
    sways him. He gave me a jewel th' other day, and[2318]           110
    now he has beat it out of my hat. Did you see my jewel?[2318][2320]

    _Third Lord._ Did you see my cap?[2321]

    _Sec. Lord._ Here 'tis.[2322]

    _Fourth Lord._ Here lies my gown.

    _First Lord._ Let's make no stay.                                115

    _Sec. Lord._ Lord Timon's mad.

    _Third Lord._                  I feel't upon my bones.[2323]

    _Fourth Lord._ One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.

                                                             [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[2054] ACT III SCENE I.] Rowe. om. Ff.

A room ...] Lucullus's House in Athens. Theobald. The City. Rowe.

[2055] waiting. Enter ...] waiting to speake with a Lord from his
Master, enters ... Ff.

[2056] _to you_] _to you_ F2.

[2057] [Aside] Johnson. om. Ff.

_men?_] Ff. _men_; Theobald.

[2058] [Exit Servant.] Capell om. Ff.

[2059] _who_] _he_ Seymour conj.

[2060] _ha'_] F4. _ha_ F1 F2 F3.

[2061] _of purpose_] F1 F2. _on purpose_ F3 F4.

[2062] _has_] _hath_ F4.

_ha'_] F4. _ha_ F1 F2 F3.

[2063] _ne'er_] _never_ F4.

Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter ... Ff.

[2064] [drinking, and giving Wine to him. Capell.

[2065] [To Serv.] To the servant. Pope. To the servant, who goes out.
Theobald. om. Ff.

[2066] [Exit Serv.] Edd. om. Ff.

[2067] [Throwing ...] Capell. Throwing the money away. Rowe. om. Ff.

[2068] [Exit.] Exit L. F1. Exit Lucullus. F2 F3 F4. Picks up the money,
and exit. Edd. conj.

[2069] _molten_] F4. _moulten_ F1 F2. _multen_ F3.

[2070] _I ... honour_] Arranged as in Pope. One line in Ff.

_slave, Unto his honour_,] Stevens (1778). _slave unto his honor_, F1
F2. _slave unto his honour_, F3. _slave unto his honour_ F4. _slave
Unto this hour_ Pope. _slave, Undo his honour_, Jackson conj. _slave
unto his humour_ Collier MS. _slander Unto his honour_ Dyce. _slave
Unto dishonour_ Staunton conj.

[2071] _turn_] _come_ F3 F4.

[2072] _diseases ... upon't_] _diseases ... on't_, ending the lines
_diseases ... death ... nature_, or _disease ... upon't_, ending the
lines _O ... when ... nature_ S. Walker conj.

[2073] _of nature Which my_] _Of nature my_ Pope, ending the previous
line at _part. Of nurture my_ Hanmer.

[2074] _any_] om. Pope.

[2075] _but_] _or_ Pope.

[2076] SCENE II.] Pope.

A public place.] Capell. A publick Street. Theobald.

[2077] First Stran.] 1. Ff (and elsewhere).

[2078] _he_] F2.

[2079] Sec. Stran.] 2. Ff (and elsewhere).

[2080] _so many_] _fifty_ Theobald.

[2081] _in't._] F1. _in._ F2. _in that._ F3 F4.

[2082] _mistook_] _o'er-look'd_ Hanmer. _mis-look'd_ Warburton. _not
mistook_ Johnson conj. _missed_ Edwards conj.

_sent to_] _sent him to_ F4.

[2083] _so many_] _twice so many or thrice so many_ S. Walker conj.

[2084] [To Lucius. Rowe.

[2085] _Fare thee well_] F4. _Farthewell_ F1 F2 F3.

[2086] [Going. Edd. conj.

[2087] _has_] _hath_ F4.

[2088] _Has_] F1 F2 F3. _H'as_ F4. _He has_ Steevens.

[2089] _so many_] _fifty_ Rowe. _five hundred_ Collier MS. _so many_
[showing a paper. Anon. conj.

[2090] _cannot_] _can't_ Hanmer.

_fifty five_] _fifty times five_ Hanmer. _fifty-five_ Capell. _five_
Collier MS. _fifty or five_ Anon. conj.

[2091] _faithfully_] _fervently_ Hanmer.

[2092] _ha'_] F4. _ha_ F1 F2 F3. _have_ Capell.

[2093] _for ... undo_] _for a little dirt, and undo_ Theobald. _a
little dirt, and undo_ Hanmer. _for a little profit, and undo_
Heath conj. _for a little park, and undo_ Johnson conj. _for a
little port, and undo_ Mason conj. _and for a little part, undo_
Jackson conj.

[2094] _do_] _do't_ Capell.

_beast, I say_] _beast I say_ Ff. _beast I, say_ Hanmer. _beast I, I
say_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[2095] _say_,] om. Pope

[2096] _mine_] _my_ F4.

[2097] _a good_] _as good a_ Hanmer.

[Exit....] Johnson. After line 55 in Ff.

[2098] _Do you observe_] _Observe you_ Steevens conj.

_this_] _this now_ Hanmer.

_Ay_] _Ay, ay_ Hanmer.

[2099] _Why ... purse_:] Arranged as by Capell. Six lines, ending
_soule, ... peece ... friend ... knowing ... father, ... purse:_ in
Ff. See note (IX).

[2100] _soul ... spirit_] Theobald. _soule ... sport_ Ff. _sport ...
soul_ Steevens, 1773 (Upton conj.). _soul ... port_ Collier (Collier
MS.). _soul ... coat_ Warburton conj. (withdrawn).

[2101] _purse_] _purse afloat_ Seymour conj.

[2102] _O, see_] _to see_ S. Walker conj.

[2103] _O, see ... man When ... shape!_] _O see ... man, When ...
shape!_ Theobald. _oh see ... man, When ... shape_: Ff (_shape_; F1).
_oh see ... man! When ... shape_, Rowe.

[2104] _For ... life_,] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[2105] _came any ... over_] _any ... came o'er_ Pope. _e'er came
any ... over_ Capell. _e'er came any ... o'er_ Dyce (ed. 2).

[2106] _And_] _Most generous and_ Hanmer.

[2107] _put ... into_] _but ... in_ Jackson conj.

_donation_] _partition_ Hanmer.

[2108] _return'd to_] _attorn'd to_ Hanmer. _remain'd with_ Capell conj.

[2109] _return'd ... heart_] _return'd His heart, I so much love_
Becket conj.

[2110] _sits above_] _still sits 'bove_ Seymour conj.

[2111] SCENE III.] Pope. om. Ff. A room....] Capell.

[2112] Enter....] Capell. Enter a third servant with Sempronius,
another of Timons Friends. Ff.

[2113] _Must ... others?_] As in Steevens. Two lines, the first ending
_Hum_, in Ff.

_in't,--hum!--'bove_] _in't? Hum: 'Bove_ F1 F2 F3 (_Bove_ F2). _in't
Humb. Bove_ F4. _in't? 'bove_ Pope. _in 't? Hum! Above_ Johnson.

[2114] _these_] _three_ Rowe (ed. 2). _these three_ Pope. _of these_
or _these men_ or _these lords_ Anon. conj.

[2115] _Owe_] F2 F3 F4. _Owes_ F1.

_My Lord_] _Oh my lord_ Pope.

[2116] _My ... him._] As in Steevens (1778), following Capell. Line 6
ends at _mettle_, in Ff.

[2117] _They have_] _They've_ Pope.

_and found_] F1. _and all are found_ F2 F3 F4.

[2118] _for ... him_] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Ff.

[2119] _have they_] om. Pope.

[2120] _Has ... denied_] _Ventidius and Lucullus both deny'd_ Pope.
See note (X).

[2121] _him_:] _him. What!_ S. Walker conj., ending lines 9-12 at
_shows ... What!... like ... take ... upon me?,_ and omitting
_Thrive._

[2122] _refuge?... give_] _refuge then? His friends, Like thriv'd
physicians, give_ Capell, ending the lines _friends ... must ...
me?_

[2123] _His friends_] F1 F4. _His friend_: F2 F3. _Friends_ Hanmer.

[2124] _Thrive, give him over_:] F1. _That thriv'd, give him over._
F2 F3 F4. _Three give him over?_ Pope. _Thriv'd, give him over?_
Theobald. _Tried give him over_, Hanmer. _Shriv'd give him over:_
Tyrwhitt conj. _Thrice give him over:_ Knight (Johnson conj.). _Have
given him over;_ Mitford conj. _Fee'd give him over:_ Anon. conj.

_must_] _and must_ Hanmer.

_upon_] _On_ Pope, ending lines 12, 13 at _cure ... angry_.

[2125] _Has_] _H'as_ Rowe. _He has_ Steevens.

_at him_] om. Pope.

[2126] _That_] _He_ Pope.

_sense_] _'scuse_ Collier conj.

[2127] _received_] _received any_ Hanmer. _receiv'd_ Johnson.

[2128] _now_] om. Pope.

[2129] _No_:] om. Hanmer. See note (XI).

[2130] _I_] F2 F3 F4. om. F1. _I shall_ Hanmer.

[2131] _I'd_] _I'de_ F1. _Ide_ F2 F3 F4. _I had_ Capell.

[2132] _Had_] F1 F2 F3. _H'ad_ F4. _He had_ Johnson.

[2133] _I'd_] F4. _I'de_ F1. _Ide_ F2 F3. _I had_ Capell.

_to do_] _to have done_ Pope, reading _But now return_, as a separate
line.

[2134] _Excellent ... fire_:] Prose in Ff. As nine lines of verse in
Capell, ending _lordship's ... what ... politick; ... think, ...
man ... strives ... copies to ... hot ... fire_.

[2135] _knew not_] _knew_ Johnson conj.

_politic_] _so politick_ Capell.

[2136] _and ... but_] _but then_ Seymour conj.

[2137] _villanies_] _policy_ Hanmer.

_clear_] _dear_ Becket conj.

[2138] _to appear_] _not to appear_ Hanmer.

_wicked_] _wicked by_ Capell.

[2139] _hot ardent_] _hot And ardent_ Capell.

[2140] _Of ... love._] As verse first by Johnson. Prose in Ff.

[2141] _best_] _last_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2142] _only the gods_] _the gods only_ Pope.

[2143] SCENE IV.] Pope. SCENE II. Rowe.

A hall....] Timon's Hall. Rowe.

[2144] Enter ...] Malone, after Capell. Enter Varro's man, meeting
others. All Timons Creditors to wait for his comming out. Then enter
Lucius and Hortensius. Ff.

[2145] First Var. Serv.] 1. V. Capell. Var. man. Ff. Var. Rowe.

[2146] _Lucius ... money_] As in Capell. Prose in Ff.

[2147] _What, do_] Capell. _what do_ Ff. _why do_ Pope.]

Luc. Serv.] Malone. Luc. or Luci. Ff (and elsewhere).

_Ay, and_] om. Pope, reading, _I ... all_ as one line. _And_ Johnson.

[2148] _Is ... brother._] Two lines in Capell, the first ending _Sir_.

[2149] Enter Philotus.] Ff. Enter Philo. Rowe. Enter Philotas. Pope.

_Philotus_] Ff. _Philo's_ Rowe. _Philotas's_ Pope. _Philotus'_ Delius.

[2150] _Welcome, ... hour?_] As in Ff. One line in Pope.

[2151] _do you_] Ff. _d'you_ Pope.

[2152] _on't_] om. Pope.

[2153] _but_] _but now_ Hanmer.

_wax'd_] _waxed_ Pope.

[2154] _that a_] _That such a_ Hanmer, ending lines 10-12, _wont ...
days ... consider_.

_prodigal_] _prodigal's_ Theobald.

[2155] _Is ... fear_] Two lines, ending _sun's ... fear_, S. Walker
conj.

_recoverable. I fear_] Johnson. _recoverable, I feare_: Ff, reading
_Is ... feare_ as one line.

[2156] _'Tis ... little_] As in Pope. Prose in Ff. Johnson puts _That
is_ in a separate line.

[2157] _Most_] om. Pope.

[2158] _I_] _you_ Singer, ed. 1 (Theobald conj.).

[2159] _It is_] om. Pope, ending lines 21-25 _heart ... pay ...
lord ... 'em_.

_Mark_] om. Pope. _Mark you_ Capell.

[2160] _I'm_] _I am_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_I'm ... witness_] One line in Rove. Two in Ff.

[2161] _And now ingratitude_] _Ingratitude now_ Pope.

[2162] First Var. Serv.] 1. V. Capell. Varro. F1 F2 F3. Var. F4.

_Yes ... yours_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2163] _mine_] om. Pope.

[2164] First Var. Serv.] 1. V. Capell. Var. Ff (and elsewhere).

_much_] _too much_ Pope. _much too_ Hanmer.

[2165] _his_] _mine_ Johnson conj. _this_ Jackson conj.

[2166] _Flaminius ... forth?_] Prose in Ff. Verse in Pope.

[2167] _I need ... diligent._] Prose in Ff. Verse in Hanmer.

[2168] [Exit.] Exit Flaminius. Steevens (1778). om. Ff.

[2169] Enter Flavius....] Enter Steward.... Ff.

[2170] Sec. Var. Serv.] Edd. 2. Varro. Ff. 1. Var. Serv. Malone. Both
Var. Serv. Dyce.

_sir,--_] Rowe. _sir._ Ff.

[2171] _ye_] _you_ F4.

_friend_] _friends_ Dyce.

[2172] _Ay_,] Put in a separate line by Capell. om. F4.

[2173] _'Twere sure ... quietly_] Capell ends the lines _not ...
eat ... fawn ... interest ... wrong, ... quietly_. Keightley follows
Capell, except that he ends line 53 at _yourselves_.

[2174] _eat_] _ate_ Keightley.

[2175] _could_] F1. _would_ F2 F3 F4.

[2176] _into_] _in_ Pope.

[2177] _If_] F4. _If't_ F1. _Ift_ F2 F3.

_'twill not serve_] _'twill not_ Steevens (1793), ending lines 57, 58
at _not ... knaves_.

[2178] [Exit.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[2179] First Var. Serv.] 1. Var. Serv. Malone. 1. Varro. Ff. Var. Rowe.

_How!_] _How's that? What says he?_ Capell, reading lines 60-65 as
verse, ending _does ... poor ... broader ... in?... buildings_.

[2180] Sec. Var. Serv.] 2. Var. Serv. Malone. 2. Varro. Ff. Tit. Rowe.

[2181] _rail_] _have leave to rail_ Capell.

[2182] _O, here's ... chamber._] Prose in Ff. Seven lines of verse in
Capell. Pope reads lines 66--70 _O ... soul_, as prose; the rest as
three lines of verse.

[2183] _know_] _have_ Rowe.

[2184] _to repair_] _But to repair_ Capell.

[2185] _derive much_] _much derive_ Steevens.

_from 't_] _from it_ Pope.

_take 't of_] _take it of_ Pope. _take it o'_ Capell.

[2186] _he's_] F1 F3 F4. _hes_ F2. _He is_ Pope.

[2187] _And if_] _An if_ S. Walker conj.

_it_] _he_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2188] _answer, sir_] _an answer_ Rowe. _an answer, sir_ Collier
(Collier MS.).

[2189] in a rage] Ff. om. Capell.

Flaminius following.] Capell. om. Ff.

[2190] SCENE V. Pope.

[2191] _gaol_] F4. _gaole_ F1. _goale_ F2. _goal_ F3.

[2192] _Put in ... My lord_,--] Verse in Capell.

[2193] _here is_] _here's_ F4.

[2194] Hor.] Capell. 1. Var. Ff. Hor. Serv. Malone.

[2195] Both Var. Serv.] Malone. 2. Var. Ff. Cap. Rowe. VarS. Capell.

[2196] _All_] _And_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2197] _lord_,--] Capell. _lord._ Ff.

[2198] _Cut_] _Cut out_ Pope.

[2199] _Five ... and yours?_] Prose in Hudson. One line in Dyce. Two
lines in Ff, the first ending _that_.

[2200] _pays_] _pay_ Pope.

_What_] _What's_ Hanmer.

[2201] First Var. Serv.] 1. Var. Serv. Malone. 1. Var. Ff. Var. Rowe.

[2202] _lord,--_] _lord--_ Rowe. _lord._ Ff.

[2203] Sec. Var. Serv.] 2. Var. Serv. Malone. 2. Var. Ff. Cap. Rowe.

[2204] _Tear ... upon_] _Here tear ... on_ Pope. _Here tear ... upon_
Capell.

[Exit.] Exit Timon. Ff.

[2205] Re-enter....] Pope. Enter Timon and Flavius. Rowe. Enter Timon.
Ff.

[2206] _lord,--_] Johnson. _lord._ Ff.

[2207] _My lord_] _My dear lord_ Rowe.

[2208] _and_] _add_ F2.

_Sempronius: all_] F3 F4. _Sempronius Vllorxa: All_ F1. _Semprovius:
all_ F2. _Sempronius; Ullorxa, all_ Malone. _Sempronius, all, look,
sir_ or _Sempronius--_ Flav. _Alack, sir._ Tim. _All_ Collier conj.
_Sempronius, Valerius, all_ S. Walker conj. _Sempronius--_ Flav. _O
my lord!_ Tim. _All_ Delius conj. _Sempronius; Ventidius, all_ Grant
White. _Sempronius; all on 'em, all_ Keightley. _Sempronius: All,
sirrah, all_ Edd. (Globe ed.).

[2209] _O my ... table._] As verse first by Pope. Prose in Ff.

[2210] _There is_] Capell. _There's_ Ff.

_to_] Ff. _as to_ Rowe.

[2211] _Be it_] Ff. _Be 't_ Steevens (1793).

_in_] om. Pope.

[2212] _Go_] In a separate line by Edd. At beginning of line 118 in Ff.
At end of line 116 in Capell.

[2213] _I charge thee_,] _and_ Pope.

[2214] SCENE V.] Capell. SCENE III. Rowe. SCENE VI. Pope.

The Senate-house.] Theobald. The city. Rowe. om. Ff.

[2215] The Senate sitting.] Dyce. The Senate sitting. Enter Alcibiades,
attended. Capell. Enter three Senators at one doore, Alcibiades meeting
them, with Attendants. Ff.

[2216] _My ... die_] As in Reed (1803). Three lines, ending _too't ...
Bloody: ... dye:_ in Ff. Two lines, the first ending _bloody_, in
Rowe. Prose in Collier.

[2217] _lord_] _lords_ Dyce conj.

_to it_] Reed (1803). _too 't_ F1 F2. _to't_ F3 F4.

_fault's_] F3 F4. _faults_ F1 F2.

[2218] _him_] Hanmer. _'em_ Ff.

Enter....] Dyce.

[2219] _Honour, health_] _Health, honour_ Pope.

[2220] _Now, captain?_] Capell. _Now captaine._ F1 F2. _Now captain._
F3. _Now, captain._ F4. _Now? Captain._ Johnson.

[2221] _He is_] _He's_ F4.

[2222] _He is ... But_] See note (XII).

[2223] _Of ... foe_] Five lines in Keightley, ending _fact ...
which ... fury ... reputation ... foe_.

[2224] _fair_] _free_ S. Walker conj.

[2225] _touch'd_] _Touched_ Keightley.

[2226] _and unnoted_] _and innated_ Becket conj. _undenoted_ Jackson
conj. _and unwonted_ Anon. conj.

[2227] _behave his_] Rowe. _behoove his_ Ff. _behave in 's_ Hanmer.
_behave, his_ Steevens (1773). _behalve his_ Malone conj. _behood his_
Singer, ed. 2 (Jackson conj.). _reprove his_ Collier (Collier MS.).

_behave ... spent_] _behold his adversary shent_ Johnson conj.
_behave, ere was his anger spent_ Steevens conj. _behave; his anger
was, 'ere spent_ Becket conj.

[2228] _proved_] _mov'd_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[2229] _if_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2230] _To bring ... born_] Five lines, ending _set ... which ...
came ... factions ... born,_ S. Walker conj.

[2231] _manslaughter_] _mad-slaughter_ F2.

_and_] om. Pope.

_quarrelling_] _This over-readiness in quarrelling_ Anon. conj.

[2232] _were_] _were but_ Pope.

[2233] _The ... carelessly_,] Two lines in Pope. Three, ending
_breath, ... outsides, ... carelessly,_ in Ff.

_make ... to wear_] _take his wrongs To wear_ Anon. conj., omitting
_His outsides_.

[2234] _outsides, to wear them_] _outside-wear: hang_ Warburton.

_to wear_] _wear_ Pope.

[2235] _to his_] _to 's_ S. Walker conj.

[2236] _lord,--_] _lord!--_ Rowe. _lord._ Ff.

[2237] _To ... bear_] _It is not valour to revenge, but bear_ Pope.

_valour_] _true valour_ Anon. conj.

[2238] _threats_] _threatnings_ Pope. _treatments_ Anon. conj.

_sleep upon 't_] _nay, sleep upon 't_ Capell. _sleep upon it_ Steevens.
_and sleep upon 't_ Long MS.

[2239] _the_] _their_ Long MS.

[2240] _repugnancy_] _repugnance_ S. Walker conj., reading _Without ...
valour_ as one line.

_If_] _but if_ Pope. _Or, if_ Capell. _An if_ Anon. conj. _If that_
Anon. conj.

_If there be_] _If there be then_ Keightley.

[2241] _the bearing_] _bearing_ S. Walker conj., reading _In
bearing ... abroad_ as one line.

[2242] _then_] _then sure_ Pope. _then, the_ Johnson conj.

[2243] _And ... lords_,] See note (XIII).

[2244] _mercy_,] _mercy!_ Delius.

_most_] _made_ Warburton.

[2245] _breathe_] _breath_ Ff. _preach_ Edd. conj.

[2246] _His ... Byzantium_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[2247] _I say, ... has_] _I say my lords h'as_ Pope. _Why say my Lords
ha 's_ F1. _Why I say my Lords ha's_ F2 F3. _Why, I say my Lords
h'as_ F4. _Why, I say, my lords, he has_ Capell. _Why, I say, my
lords, has_ Dyce. _I say, my lords, he has_ Edd. (Globe Ed.).

[2248] _And slain in fight_] _And slain in battle_ Pope. _slain In
battle_ Hanmer, ending line 62 at _slain_.

[2249] _made_] _made murder_ Anon. conj.

[2250] _with 'em; He's a_] _with em Hes a_ F2. _with em He's a_
F3. _with 'em, He's a_ F4. _with him: He's a_ F1. _with 'em, he Is
a_ Hanmer. _with 'em, he's A_ Malone. _with 'em here. He's a_ S.
Walker conj. _with himself; He's a_ Keightley.

[2251] _sworn_] _swoln_ Warburton.

[2252] Divided as in Ff. Malone ends line 67 at _often_.

[2253] _That often_] _Oft'_ Hanmer.

_and takes his_] _and takes_ Pope. _takes his_ Capell.

[2254] _If there were ... enough_] _Were there ... enough alone_
Pope. _And, if there were ... enough_ Capell. _Were there ...
itself enough_ Collier MS. _That if there were ... enough_ Long MS.
_If there were no more foes, that were enough_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker
conj.). _If there were no other foes, that were enough_ Keightley.

_foes_] _moe foes_ or _foes else_ Anon. conj.

[2255] As in Capell. The lines end _security, ... you ... returnes_,
in Ff. Pope ends them _love ... victories ... returns._ S. Walker ends
them _know ... security ... you ... return._

[2256] _all_] om. Pope.

[2257] _honours_] F2 F3 F4. _honour_ F1.

_upon_] _on_ Pope.

_returns_] _return_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2258] _war_] F3 F4. _warre_ F1. _waare_ F2.

[2259] _My ... me._] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[2260] _remembrances_] _remembrance_, Capell, ending line 90 at _Call
me._

[2261] _What!_] _What, sir!_ Hanmer.

[2262] _has_] F1 F2. _hath_] F3 F4.

[2263] _in_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

_in few_] _few in_ Rann (Johnson conj.).

[2264] _contain_] _contains_ Rowe.

[2265] _Attend ... spirit_,] One line in Capell. Two in Ff.

[2266] _And ... presently._] _And note, to swell your spirit, He...._
or _And, but to swell your spirit, He...._ Theobald conj. 2. Sen. _And,
(not to swell our spirit) he shall then Be executed presently._
Hanmer. _And, (now to swell your spirit,) He shall...._ Warburton.
_And, not to swell your spirit, He...._ Capell. _And, not to sweal
our spirit, He...._ Becket conj. _And, to show well our spirit, He...._
Anon. conj.

[2267] _swell_] _quell_ Singer conj.

[2268] [Exeunt....] Exeunt Senate. Capell. Exeunt. Ff.

[2269] _Now ... live_] As in Steevens. Two lines, the first ending
_enough_, in Ff.

_Now the_] om. Pope.

_enough_] om. Capell.

[2270] _in bone_] _at home_ or _in doors_ Staunton conj.

_on_] _upon_ Keightley.

[2271] _Banishment!_] _Banishment._ F1. _ha Banishment._ F2 F3. _Ha!
Banishment!_ F4.

[2272] _lay_] _play_ Johnson conj.

_lay for hearts_] _say,--Forth hearts!_ Jackson conj.

[2273] _most lands_] _most hands_ Warburton. _most lords_ Malone conj.
_my stains_ Mason conj. _most brands_ Becket conj. _most bands_
Jackson conj.

_be_] _beat_ Jackson conj.

[2274] _should brook as little_] _as little should brook_ Pope.

[2275] SCENE VI.] Capell. SCENE IV. Rowe. SCENE VII. Pope.

A banqueting-room....] Timon's House. Rowe. State Room.... Capell.

[2276] Music ... doors.] Capell, substantially. Enter divers Friends at
severall doores. Ff. Enter divers Senators at several doors. Rowe.

[2277] First Lord.] 1. L. Capell. 1. Ff. 1. Sen. Rowe (and throughout).

[2278] Sec. Lord.] 2. L. Capell. 2. Ff. 2. Sen. Rowe (and throughout).

[2279] _tiring_] _stirring_ Jackson conj.

[2280] _here 's_] F4. _heares_ F1 F2. _heare_ F3.

[2281] Sec. Lord.] 2. L. Capell. 2. Ff. 3. Sen Rowe.

_me, sir,--_] _me for--_ S. Walker conj.

[2282] _The ... lordship._] Prose in F1 F2. Two lines in F3 F4.

[2283] _willing_] _willingly_ F4.

[2284] _Nor ... men._] Marked as 'Aside' by Johnson.

[2285] _harshly o' the trumpet's_] _harshly o' the trumpets_ Ff.
_harshly as o' the trumpets_ Rowe. _harshly as on the trumpets_
Pope. _harshly, as o' the trumpets_ Capell. _harshly on the
trumpet's_ Singer (ed. 1). _harshly. The trumpets_ S. Walker conj.
_harshly. O, the trumpets_ Dyce, ed. 2 (Grant White conj.).

_harshly_] _sparingly_ Anon. conj.

[2286] _lord,--_] Hanmer. _lord._ Ff.

[2287] _My most_] _Most_ Pope (ed. 2).

_I am_] _I'm_ Rowe.

[2288] _this other_] F1. _the other_ F2 F3 F4. _t'other_ Rowe.

[2289] _before--_] Rowe. _before._ Ff.

[2290] [The banquet brought in.] Ff, after line 40. Transferred by Dyce
and Staunton. Goes toward the table. Capell.

[2291] Third Lord.] 3. L. Capell. 3. Ff. 3. Sen. Rowe (and throughout).

[2292] _hear ... it?_] _hear ... it._ F2.

[2293] First and Sec. Lord.] Both. Ff.

[2294] _you_] _ye_ Theobald.

[2295] _Will 't ... will 't_] F4. _Wilt ... wilt_ F1 F2 F3.

[2296] _will--and so--_] Steevens. _will, and so._ F1 F2 F3. _will,
and so--_ F4. _will.--And so--_ Johnson. _will--and so._ Capell.

[2297] _sit, sit_] F1. _sir, sir_ F2 F3 F4.

[2298] _You ... welcome._] Printed in italics in Ff.

[2299] _be_] om. Pope.

[2300] _be--as they are._] Steevens (1793). _bee as they are._ F1 F2
F3. _be as they are--_ F4.

_fees_] _foes_ Hanmer (Warburton). _lees_ Singer (ed. 1).

[2301] _lag_] Rowe. _legge_ F1 F2 F3. _leg_ F4. _lee_ Capell conj.
_tag_ Anon. ap. Rann conj.

[2302] _present_] om. Pope.

[2303] _to me_] _to be_ Boswell (a misprint?).

[2304] _are they_] _they are_ Steevens (1793).

[2305] [The dishes ...] Johnson, substantially. Capell puts a similar
stage direction after line 87.

warm water.] stones and warm water. Steevens conj.

[2306] _smoke_] _stones_ Anon. conj.

[2307] _last_] After this S. Walker conjectures that a line is lost,
ending _Timon._

[2308] _you with_] Ff. _with your_ Hanmer (Warburton). _by you with_
Keightley.

_flatteries_] _flatreries_ F2. _flattery_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2309] _it_] _them_ Hanmer.

[2310] [Throwing ...] Johnson. om. Ff.

[2311] _fools_] _tools_ Theobald conj.

_time's flies_] _Times Flyes_ F1. _Time flyes_ F2. _Time flies_ F3.
_Time-flies_ F4.

[2312] _Cap-and-knee slaves_] Pope. _Cap and knee-slaves_ F1. _Cap
and knee slaves_ F2 F3 F4.

_minute-jacks!_] A full stop in F1. No stop in F2 F3 F4.

[2313] _infinite_] _infectious_ Grant White conj.

_malady_] _maladies_ Hanmer.

[2314] [Throws ... out.] Rowe, after line 99. om. Ff. Pelts them with
stones. S. Walker conj.

and ... out.] om. Delius.

[2315] Re-enter ...] Re-enter the Senators. Pope. Enter the Senators,
with other Lords. Ff. Re-enter Lords &c. Capell. The Guests return.
Grant White. Re-enter the Company. Dyce (ed. 2).

[2316] _Push_] _Psha_ Theobald. _Pish_ Hanmer.

[2317] Fourth Lord.] 4. L. Capell. 4. Ff. 4. Sen. Rowe.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[2318] _He's ... hat._] Printed as four lines of verse by Rann. Three
lines, Capell conj.

[2319] _humour_] F3 F4. _humours_ F1 F2.

[2320] _hat_] _cap_ Pope.

[2321] Third Lord.] 3. L. Capell. 2. Ff. 2. Sen. Rowe. 4 Lord.
Keightley.

[2322] Sec. Lord.] 2. L. Capell. 3. Ff. 3. Sen. Rowe.

[2323] [Exeunt.] Exeunt the Senators. Ff. om. Capell (corrected in MS.).




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _Without the walls of Athens._[2324]

                             _Enter_ TIMON.

    _Tim_. Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall,[2325]
    That girdlest in those wolves, dive in the earth,[2325][2326]
    And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
    Obedience fail in children! Slaves and fools,
    Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,                    5
    And minister in their steads! To general filths[2327]
    Convert o' the instant, green virginity![2328]
    Do't in your parents' eyes! Bankrupts, hold fast;[2329]
    Rather than render back, out with your knives,[2329]
    And cut your trusters' throats! Bound servants, steal!            10
    Large-handed robbers your grave masters are
    And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed!
    Thy mistress is o' the brothel. Son of sixteen,[2330]
    Pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire,[2331]
    With it beat out his brains! Piety and fear,[2332]                15
    Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
    Domestic awe, night-rest and neighbourhood,
    Instruction, manners, mysteries and trades,
    Degrees, observances, customs and laws,
    Decline to your confounding contraries,                           20
    And let confusion live! Plagues incident to men,[2333]
    Your potent and infectious fevers heap
    On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,
    Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
    As lamely as their manners! Lust and liberty                      25
    Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
    That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
    And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
    Sow all the Athenian bosoms, and their crop
    Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,                         30
    That their society, as their friendship, may
    Be merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee
    But nakedness, thou detestable town![2334]
    Take thou that too, with multiplying bans![2335]
    Timon will to the woods, where he shall find                      35
    The unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.[2336]
    The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all!--[2337]
    The Athenians both within and out that wall!
    And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
    To the whole race of mankind, high and low!                       40
    Amen.[2338]                 [_Exit._


SCENE II. _Athens. Timon's house._[2339]

             _Enter_ FLAVIUS, _with two or three_ Servants.

    _First Serv._ Hear you, master steward, where's our master?[2340]
    Are we undone? cast off? nothing remaining?

    _Flav._ Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
    Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
    I am as poor as you.[2341]

    _First Serv._        Such a house broke![2342]                     5
    So noble a master fall'n! All gone! and not[2342]
    One friend to take his fortune by the arm,[2342]
    And go along with him![2342]

    _Sec. Serv._           As we do turn our backs[2343]
    From our companion thrown into his grave,[2344]
    So his familiars to his buried fortunes[2344][2345]               10
    Slink all away; leave their false vows with him,[2346]
    Like empty purses pick'd; and his poor self,
    A dedicated beggar to the air,
    With his disease of all-shunn'd poverty,[2347]
    Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.[2348]           15

                        _Enter other_ Servants.

    _Flav._ All broken implements of a ruin'd house.

    _Third Serv._ Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;
    That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,[2349]
    Serving alike in sorrow: leak'd is our bark,
    And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,[2350]                20
    Hearing the surges threat: we must all part
    Into this sea of air.[2351]

    _Flav._               Good fellows all,
    The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
    Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake
    Let's yet be fellows; let's shake our heads, and say,[2352]       25
    As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
    'We have seen better days.' Let each take some.
    Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:
    Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.[2353]

                             [_Servants embrace, and part several ways._

    O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us![2354]            30
    Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
    Since riches point to misery and contempt?
    Who would be so mock'd with glory? or to live[2355]
    But in a dream of friendship?[2356]
    To have his pomp and all what state compounds[2356][2357]         35
    But only painted, like his varnish'd friends?[2358]
    Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
    Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood,[2359]
    When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!
    Who then dares to be half so kind again?                          40
    For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.[2360]
    My dearest lord, blest to be most accursed,
    Rich only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
    Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord![2361]
    He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat[2362]                45
    Of monstrous friends; nor has he with him to[2363][2364]
    Supply his life, or that which can command it.[2363]
    I'll follow, and inquire him out:[2365]
    I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;
    Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.          [_Exit._  50


SCENE III. _Woods and cave, near the sea-shore._[2366]

                 _Enter_ TIMON, _from the cave_.[2367]

    _Tim._ O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth[2368]
    Rotten humidity; below thy sister's orb
    Infect the air! Twinn'd brothers of one womb,
    Whose procreation, residence and birth
    Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes,[2369]        5
    The greater scorns the lesser: not nature,[2370][2371]
    To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune[2371]
    But by contempt of nature.[2371][2372]
    Raise me this beggar and deny 't that lord,[2373]
    The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,[2374]                 10
    The beggar native honour.
    It is the pasture lards the rother's sides,[2375]
    The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who dares,[2376]
    In purity of manhood stand upright,
    And say 'This man's a flatterer'? if one be,[2377]                15
    So are they all; for every grise of fortune[2378]
    Is smooth'd by that below: the learned pate
    Ducks to the golden fool: all is oblique;[2379]
    There's nothing level in our cursed natures
    But direct villany. Therefore be abhorr'd[2380]                   20
    All feasts, societies and throngs of men!
    His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains:
    Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots![2381]   [_Digging._
    Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
    With thy most operant poison! What is here?                       25
    Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,[2382]
    I am no idle votarist: roots, you clear heavens![2382][2383]
    Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,[2382]
    Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.[2382][2384]
    Ha, you gods! why this? what this, you gods? Why, this[2385]      30
    Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
    Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads:[2386]
    This yellow slave
    Will knit and break religions; bless the accursed;
    Make the hoar leprosy adored; place thieves,[2387]                35
    And give them title, knee and approbation
    With senators on the bench: this is it[2388]
    That makes the wappen'd widow wed again;[2389]
    She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores[2390][2391]
    Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices[2391][2392]      40
    To the April day again. Come, damned earth,[2393]
    Thou common whore of mankind, that put'st odds[2394]
    Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
    Do thy right nature. [_March afar off._] Ha! a drum?
              Thou'rt quick,[2395]
    But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,[2396]           45
    When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand:
    Nay, stay thou out for earnest.       [_Keeping some gold._[2397]

      _Enter_ ALCIBIADES, _with drum and fife, in warlike manner_;
                       PHRYNIA _and_ TIMANDRA.[A]

    _Alcib._                        What art thou there? speak.[2398]

    _Tim._ A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,[2399]
    For showing me again the eyes of man!

    _Alcib._ What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,             50
    That art thyself a man?

    _Tim._ I am misanthropos, and hate mankind.[2400]
    For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
    That I might love thee something.

    _Alcib._                          I know thee well;
    But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.                     55

    _Tim._ I know thee too; and more than that I know thee[2401]
    I not desire to know. Follow thy drum;
    With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules:[2402]
    Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
    Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine                 60
    Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
    For all her cherubin look.

    _Phry._                    Thy lips rot off!

    _Tim._ I will not kiss thee; then the rot returns[2403]
    To thine own lips again.

    _Alcib._ How came the noble Timon to this change?                 65

    _Tim._ As the moon does, by wanting light to give:
    But then renew I could not, like the moon;
    There were no suns to borrow of.[2404]

    _Alcib._ Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?[2405]

    _Tim._ None, but to maintain my opinion.[2405][2406]              70

    _Alcib._ What is it, Timon?[2405]

    _Tim._ Promise me friendship, but perform none: if thou[2405]
    wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art a man:[2405][2407]
    if thou dost perform, confound thee, for thou art a man![2405][2408]

    _Alcib._ I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.[2409]         75

    _Tim._ Thou saw'st them when I had prosperity.

    _Alcib._ I see them now; then was a blessed time.[2410]

    _Tim._ As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.

    _Timan._ Is this the Athenian minion whom the world
    Voiced so regardfully?

    _Tim._                 Art thou Timandra?[2411]                   80

    _Timan._ Yes.[2411]

    _Tim._ Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee;[2411][2412]
    Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.[2411][2412][2413]
    Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves[2412]
    For tubs and baths; bring down rose-cheeked youth[2412][2414][2415]  85
    To the tub-fast and the diet.[2412][2415][2416]

    _Timan._                      Hang thee, monster!

    _Alcib._ Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits
    Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.[2417]
    I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,[2418]
    The want whereof doth daily make revolt                           90
    In my penurious band: I have heard, and grieved,[2419]
    How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,[2420]
    Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,
    But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them--[2421]

    _Tim._ I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.               95

    _Alcib._ I am thy friend and pity thee, dear Timon.

    _Tim._ How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
    I had rather be alone.

    _Alcib._               Why, fare thee well:
    Here is some gold for thee.[2422]

    _Tim._                      Keep it, I cannot eat it.[2423]

    _Alcib._ When I have laid proud Athens on a heap--[2424]         100

    _Tim._ Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?[2425][2426]

    _Alcib._                            Ay, Timon, and have cause.[2426]

    _Tim._ The gods confound them all in thy conquest,[2426][2427]
    And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd![2426][2428]

    _Alcib._ Why me, Timon?[2426][2429]

    _Tim._                       That by killing of villains[2426]
    Thou wast born to conquer my country.[2426][2430]                105
    Put up thy gold: go on,--here's gold,--go on;
    Be as a planetary plague, when Jove[2431]
    Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
    In the sick air: let not thy sword skip one:
    Pity not honour'd age for his white beard;                       110
    He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron;[2432]
    It is her habit only that is honest,
    Herself's a bawd: let not the virgin's cheek
    Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk-paps[2433]
    That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes[2434]            115
    Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
    But set them down horrible traitors: spare not the babe[2435]
    Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;[2436]
    Think it a bastard whom the oracle[2437]
    Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,[2438]           120
    And mince it sans remorse: swear against objects;[2439]
    Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes,
    Whose proof nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
    Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,[2440]
    Shall pierce a jot. There's gold to pay thy soldiers:            125
    Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,
    Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.

    _Alcib._ Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me,[2441]
    Not all thy counsel.[2441][2442]

    _Tim._ Dost thou or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee!     130

    _Phr. and Timan._ Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?[2443]

    _Tim._ Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
    And to make whores, a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,[2444]
    Your aprons mountant: you are not oathable;[2445]
    Although, I know, you'll swear, terribly swear,                  135
    Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues,
    The immortal gods that hear you; spare your oaths,
    I'll trust to your conditions: be whores still;
    And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
    Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;                     140
    Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
    And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,[2446][2447]
    Be quite contrary: and thatch your poor thin roofs[2446][2448]
    With burdens of the dead;--some that were hang'd,[2446]
    No matter:--wear them, betray with them: whore still;[2446][2449]  145
    Paint till a horse may mire upon your face:
    A pox of wrinkles![2443]

    _Phr. and Timan._ Well, more gold: what then?
    Believe't that we'll do any thing for gold.[2450]

    _Tim._ Consumptions sow
    In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,[2451]          150
    And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,[2451][2452]
    That he may never more false title plead,
    Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,[2453]
    That scolds against the quality of flesh[2454]
    And not believes himself: down with the nose,                    155
    Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away
    Of him that, his particular to foresee,[2455][2456]
    Smells from the general weal: make curl'd-pate ruffians
        bald;[2455][2457]
    And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war
    Derive some pain from you: plague all;[2458]                     160
    That your activity may defeat and quell
    The source of all erection. There's more gold:
    Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
    And ditches grave you all!

    _Phr. and Timan._ More counsel with more money, bounteous
        Timon.[2443][2459]                                           165

    _Tim._ More whore, more mischief first; I have given you
        earnest.[2459][2460]

    _Alcib._ Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon:[2459]
    If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.[2459]

    _Tim._ If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.

    _Alcib._ I never did thee harm.[2461]                            170

    _Tim._ Yes, thou spokest well of me.

    _Alcib._                             Call'st thou that harm?

    _Tim._ Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take[2462][2463]
    Thy beagles with thee.[2462]

    _Alcib._               We but offend him. Strike![2464]

          [_Drum beats. Exeunt Alcibiades, Phrynia, and Timandra._[2465]

    _Tim._ That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,[2466]
    Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,      [_Digging._[2467]  175
    Whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast
    Teems, and feeds all; whose self-same mettle,[2468]
    Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puff'd,
    Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
    The gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm,                        180
    With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven[2469]
    Whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine;
    Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,[2470]
    From forth thy plenteous bosom one poor root![2471]
    Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,[2472]                   185
    Let it no more bring out ingrateful man![2473]
    Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves and bears;
    Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
    Hath to the marbled mansion all above[2474]
    Never presented!--O, a root! dear thanks!--                      190
    Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;[2475]
    Whereof ingrateful man, with liquorish draughts
    And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,[2476]
    That from it all consideration slips![2477]

                           _Enter_ APEMANTUS.

    More man? plague, plague![2478]                                  195

    _Apem._ I was directed hither: men report
    Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.

    _Tim._ 'Tis then because thou dost not keep a dog,
    Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee!

    _Apem._ This is in thee a nature but infected;[2479]             200
    A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
    From change of fortune. Why this spade? this place?[2480]
    This slave-like habit? and these looks of care?
    Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
    Hug their diseased perfumes and have forgot[2481]                205
    That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods[2482]
    By putting on the cunning of a carper.
    Be thou a flatterer now and seek to thrive
    By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee
    And let his very breath whom thou'lt observe                     210
    Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain[2483]
    And call it excellent: thou wast told thus;
    Thou gavest thine ears like tapsters that bade welcome[2484]
    To knaves and all approachers: 'tis most just
    That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,                  215
    Rascals should have't. Do not assume my likeness.

    _Tim._ Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.[2485]

    _Apem._ Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself,[2486]
    A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st[2487]
    That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,                  220
    Will put thy shirt on warm? will these moss'd trees,[2488]
    That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,
    And skip when thou point'st out? will the cold brook,[2489]
    Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,
    To cure thy o'er-night's surfeit? Call the creatures             225
    Whose naked natures live in all the spite
    Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
    To the conflicting elements exposed,
    Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;
    O, thou shalt find--

    _Tim._               A fool of thee: depart.[2490]               230

    _Apem._ I love thee better now than e'er I did.[2491]

    _Tim._ I hate thee worse.

    _Apem._                   Why?[2492]

    _Tim._                         Thou flatter'st misery.

    _Apem._ I flatter not, but say thou art a caitiff.

    _Tim._ Why dost thou seek me out?

    _Apem._                           To vex thee.[2493]

    _Tim._ Always a villain's office or a fool's.                    235
    Dost please thyself in't?[2494]

    _Apem._                   Ay.

    _Tim._                        What! a knave too?

    _Apem._ If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on[2495]
    To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou
    Dost it enforcedly; thou'ldst courtier be again,[2496]
    Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery                             240
    Outlives incertain pomp, is crown'd before:[2497]
    The one is filling still, never complete,
    The other at high wish: best state, contentless,[2498]
    Hath a distracted and most wretched being,[2498]
    Worse than the worst, content.                                   245
    Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.

    _Tim._ Not by his breath that is more miserable.
    Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm
    With favour never clasp'd, but bred a dog.[2499]
    Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded              250
    The sweet degrees that this brief world affords[2500]
    To such as may the passive drugs of it[2501]
    Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself[2502]
    In general riot, melted down thy youth
    In different beds of lust, and never learn'd                     255
    The icy precepts of respect, but follow'd[2503]
    The sugar'd game before thee. But myself,
    Who had the world as my confectionary,
    The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men[2504]
    At duty, more than I could frame employment;[2505]               260
    That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves[2506]
    Do on the oak, have with one winter's brush[2507]
    Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare[2507][2508]
    For every storm that blows: I, to bear this,
    That never knew but better, is some burthen:[2509]               265
    Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time
    Hath made thee hard in 't. Why shouldst thou hate men?[2491]
    They never flatter'd thee: what hast thou given?
    If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,[2510]
    Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff                      270
    To some she beggar and compounded thee
    Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone![2511]
    If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
    Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.[2512]

    _Apem._                                Art thou proud yet?

    _Tim._ Ay, that I am not thee.

    _Apem._                        I, that I was[2513]               275
    No prodigal.[2513]

    _Tim._ I, that I am one now:
    Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
    I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
    That the whole life of Athens were in this![2491]
    Thus would I eat it.[2514]          [_Eating a root._

    _Apem._              Here; I will mend thy feast.[2515][2516]    280

                                                 [_Offering him a root._

    _Tim._ First mend my company; take away thyself.[2515][2517]

    _Apem._ So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.[2515][2518]

    _Tim._ 'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd;[2515]
    If not, I would it were.[2515]

    _Apem._ What wouldst thou have to Athens?                        285

    _Tim._ Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
    Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.

    _Apem._ Here is no use for gold.

    _Tim._                           The best and truest;
    For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.

    _Apem._ Where liest o' nights, Timon?[2519]                      290

    _Tim._ Under that's above me. Where feed'st thou o'[2520]
    days, Apemantus?[2520]

    _Apem._ Where my stomach finds meat; or, rather, where[2521]
    I eat it.

    _Tim._ Would poison were obedient and knew my mind![2522]        295

    _Apem._ Where wouldst thou send it?[2523]

    _Tim._ To sauce thy dishes.

    _Apem._ The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but
    the extremity of both ends: when thou wast in thy gilt and
    thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much curiosity; in[2524]   300
    thy rags thou know'st none, but art despised for the contrary.
    There's a medlar for thee; eat it.[2525]

    _Tim._ On what I hate I feed not.[2525]

    _Apem._ Dost hate a medlar?[2525]

    _Tim._ Ay, though it look like thee.[2525][2526]                 305

    _Apem._ An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou[2525][2527]
    shouldst have loved thyself better now. What man didst[2525]
    thou ever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?[2525]

    _Tim._ Who, without those means thou talk'st of, didst[2525]
    thou ever know beloved?[2525]                                    310

    _Apem._ Myself.[2525]

    _Tim._ I understand thee; thou hadst some means to[2525]
    keep a dog.[2525]

    _Apem._ What things in the world canst thou nearest
    compare to thy flatterers?                                       315

    _Tim._ Women nearest; but men, men are the things
    themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus,
    if it lay in thy power?

    _Apem._ Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

    _Tim._ Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of        320
    men, and remain a beast with the beasts?[2528]

    _Apem._ Ay, Timon.

    _Tim._ A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t'
    attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would beguile thee:[2529]
    if thou wert the lamb, the fox would eat thee: if thou           325
    wert the fox, the lion would suspect thee when peradventure
    thou wert accused by the ass: if thou wert the ass,
    thy dulness would torment thee, and still thou livedst but[2530]
    as a breakfast to the wolf: if thou wert the wolf, thy greediness
    would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst hazard thy             330
    life for thy dinner: wert thou the unicorn, pride and wrath
    would confound thee and make thine own self the conquest
    of thy fury: wert thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by
    the horse: wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by
    the leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the        335
    lion, and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life:
    all thy safety were remotion, and thy defence absence.[2531]
    What beast couldst thou be that were not subject to a
    beast? and what a beast art thou already, that seest not[2532]
    thy loss in transformation!                                      340

    _Apem._ If thou couldst please me with speaking to me,[2533]
    thou mightst have hit upon it here: the commonwealth of[2533]
    Athens is become a forest of beasts.[2533]

    _Tim._ How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out
    of the city?[2534]                                               345

    _Apem._ Yonder comes a poet and a painter: the plague[2535][2536]
    of company light upon thee! I will fear to catch it, and[2535]
    give way: when I know not what else to do, I'll see thee[2535]
    again.[2535]

    _Tim._ When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt[2535]   350
    be welcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.[2535]

    _Apem._ Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.[2537]

    _Tim._ Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon![2537]

    _Apem._ A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.[2537][2538]  355

    _Tim._ All villains that do stand by thee are pure.[2537]

    _Apem._ There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.[2537]

    _Tim._ If I name thee.[2539][2540]
    I'll beat thee; but I should infect my hands.[2539][2541]

    _Apem._ I would my tongue could rot them off![2542]              360

    _Tim._ Away, thou issue of a mangy dog![2543]
    Choler does kill me that thou art alive;
    I swoon to see thee.[2543][2544]

    _Apem._ Would thou wouldst burst![2545][2546]

    _Tim._ Away, thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall[2546]        365
    lose a stone by thee.[2546]      [_Throws a stone at him._[2547]

    _Apem._ Beast![2546]

    _Tim._ Slave![2546]

    _Apem._ Toad![2546]

    _Tim._ Rogue, rogue, rogue![2546][2548]                          370
    I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
    But even the mere necessities upon't.[2549]
    Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;
    Lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
    Thy grave-stone daily: make thine epitaph,                       375
    That death in me at others' lives may laugh.[2550]
    [_To the gold_] O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce[2551]
    'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler[2552]
    Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
    Thou ever young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,[2553]         380
    Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
    That lies on Dian's lap! thou visible god,[2554]
    That solder'st close impossibilities,
    And makest them kiss! that speak'st with every tongue,
    To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!                        385
    Think thy slave man rebels; and by thy virtue[2555]
    Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
    May have the world in empire!

    _Apem._                       Would 'twere so![2556]
    But not till I am dead. I'll say thou hast gold:[2557]
    Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.

    _Tim._                            Throng'd to![2558]

    _Apem._                                        Ay.               390

    _Tim._ Thy back, I prithee.

    _Apem._                      Live, and love thy misery![2559]

    _Tim._ Long live so, and so die! [_Exit Apemantus._] I am quit.[2560]
    Moe things like men? Eat, Timon, and abhor them.[2561]

                           _Enter_ Banditti.

    _First Ban._ Where should he have this gold? It is some[2562]
    poor fragment, some slender ort of his remainder: the mere       395
    want of gold, and the falling-from of his friends, drove him[2563]
    into this melancholy.

    _Sec. Ban._ It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.[2564]

    _Third Ban._ Let us make the assay upon him: if he
    care not for't, he will supply us easily; if he covetously       400
    reserve it, how shall's get it?

    _Sec. Ban._ True; for he bears it not about him; 'tis hid.[2565]

    _First Ban._ Is not this he?

    _Banditti._ Where?[2566]

    _Sec. Ban._ 'Tis his description.                                405

    _Third Ban._ He; I know him.[2567]

    _Banditti._ Save thee, Timon.[2566]

    _Tim._ Now, thieves?[2568]

    _Banditti._ Soldiers, not thieves.[2566]

    _Tim._ Both too; and women's sons.[2569]                         410

    _Banditti._ We are not thieves, but men that much do want.[2566][2570]

    _Tim._ Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.[2571][2572][2573]
    Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;[2572]
    Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;[2574]
    The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;[2575]               415
    The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush
    Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?

    _First Ban._ We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
    As beasts and birds and fishes.

    _Tim._ Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds and fishes;       420
    You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
    That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not
    In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft
    In limited professions. Rascal thieves,[2576]
    Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' the grape,             425
    Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,[2577]
    And so 'scape hanging: trust not the physician;
    His antidotes are poison, and he slays
    Moe than you rob: take wealth and lives together;[2578]
    Do villany, do, since you protest to do't,[2579][2580]           430
    Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery:[2580]
    The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction
    Robs the vast sea: the moon's an arrant thief,[2581]
    And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:
    The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves                   435
    The moon into salt tears: the earth's a thief,[2582]
    That feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n[2583]
    From general excrement: each thing's a thief:[2584]
    The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
    Have uncheck'd theft. Love not yourselves; away,[2585]           440
    Rob one another. There's more gold. Cut throats:[2586]
    All that you meet are thieves: to Athens go,
    Break open shops; nothing can you steal,[2587]
    But thieves do lose it: steal not less for this[2588][2589][2590]
    I give you; and gold confound you howsoe'er![2588][2590][2591]   445
    Amen.[2588][2592]

    _Third Ban._ Has almost charmed me from my profession[2593]
    by persuading me to it.

    _First Ban._ 'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus[2594]
    advises us; not to have us thrive in our mystery.[2595]          450

    _Sec. Ban._ I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over[2596]
    my trade.[2596]

    _First Ban._ Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no[2597]
    time so miserable but a man may be true.[2597][2598]

                                                    [_Exeunt Banditti._

                            _Enter_ FLAVIUS.

    _Flav._ O you gods![2599]                                        455
    Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
    Full of decay and failing? O monument[2600]
    And wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd![2600]
    What an alteration of honour[2601][2602]
    Has desperate want made![2601]                                   460
    What viler thing upon the earth than friends[2603]
    Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
    How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
    When man was wish'd to love his enemies![2604]
    Grant I may ever love, and rather woo[2605]                      465
    Those that would mischief me than those that do![2605][2606]
    Has caught me in his eye: I will present[2607][2608]
    My honest grief unto him, and, as my lord,[2608][2609]
    Still serve him with my life. My dearest master![2608]

    _Tim._ Away! what art thou?[2610]

    _Flav._                     Have you forgot me, sir?[2611]       470

    _Tim._ Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;[2612]
    Then, if thou grant'st thou'rt a man, I have forgot thee.[2613]

    _Flav._ An honest poor servant of yours.[2614]

    _Tim._ Then I know thee not:[2615]
    I never had honest man about me, I; all[2616]                    475
    I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.[2617]

    _Flav._ The gods are witness,
    Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
    For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.

    _Tim._ What, dost thou weep? come nearer; then I love
        thee,[2618][2619]                                            480
    Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st
    Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
    But thorough lust and laughter. Pity's sleeping:[2620][2621]
    Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping![2621]

    _Flav._ I beg of you to know me, good my lord,                   485
    To accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts
    To entertain me as your steward still.

    _Tim._ Had I a steward[2622][2623]
    So true, so just, and now so comfortable?[2622]
    It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.[2622][2624]            490
    Let me behold thy face. Surely this man[2622]
    Was born of woman.[2622]
    Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
    You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim[2625]
    One honest man--mistake me not--but one;[2626]                   495
    No more, I pray,--and he's a steward.[2626][2627]
    How fain would I have hated all mankind!
    And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee,
    I fell with curses.
    Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;                     500
    For, by oppressing and betraying me,
    Thou mightst have sooner got another service:
    For many so arrive at second masters,
    Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true--
    For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure--                    505
    Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,[2628]
    If not a usuring kindness and as rich men deal gifts,[2629]
    Expecting in return twenty for one?

    _Flav._ No, my most worthy master; in whose breast
    Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:                    510
    You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:
    Suspect still comes where an estate is least.[2630]
    That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
    Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,[2631]
    Care of your food and living; and, believe it,[2632]             515
    My most honour'd lord,[2633][2634]
    For any benefit that points to me,[2634]
    Either in hope or present, I'ld exchange[2634][2635]
    For this one wish, that you had power and wealth[2634]
    To requite me by making rich yourself.[2634]                     520

    _Tim._ Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,[2636]
    Here, take: the gods, out of my misery,
    Have sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy;[2637]
    But thus condition'd: thou shalt build from men,
    Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,                       525
    But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone
    Ere thou relieve the beggar: give to dogs
    What thou deniest to men; let prisons swallow 'em,[2638]
    Debts wither 'em to nothing: be men like blasted woods,[2639]
    And may diseases lick up their false bloods!                     530
    And so farewell, and thrive.

    _Flav._                      O, let me stay[2640]
    And comfort you, my master.[2640]

    _Tim._                      If thou hatest curses[2641]
    Stay not: fly, whilst thou art blest and free:[2641][2642]
    Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.

                                              [_Exeunt severally._[2643]

FOOTNOTES:

[2324] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Rowe.

Without ...] Rowe.

[2325] _thee. O ... wolves_,] Ff. _thee, O ... wolves!_ Pope.

[2326] _girdlest_] Rowe. _girdles_ Ff.

[2327] _steads! To ... filths_] _steads: to ... filths_ Pope, ed. 2
(Theobald). _steeds, to ... filthes._ F1 F2. _steeds to ... filthes._
F3. _steads to ... filths_ F4.

_filths_] _filth_ Hanmer.

[2328] _green virginity!_] _green, virginity_ Pope (ed. 1).

[2329] _fast; Rather ... back, out_] Theobald (Anon. conj.). f_ast
Rather ... backe; out_ F1 F2 F3. _fast, Rather ... back; out_ F4.

[2330] _o' the_] _i' th'_ Hanmer. _at the_ Keightley.

_Son_] _Some_ F1.

[2331] _lined_] _lean'd_ Keightley.

[2332] _With ... brains_] _And with it beat his brains out_ Pope.

_Piety and fear_] _Fear and piety_ Pope.

[2333] _let_] Hanmer. _yet_ Ff.

[2334] _detestable town_] _town detestable_ Hanmer.

[2335] [Throwing away his raiment. Delius conj. Plucking out his hair.
Ingleby conj.

[2336] _more_] _much_ F4.

[2337] _you_] _ye_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2338] _Amen_] om. Pope.

[2339] SCENE II.] Rowe.

Athens ...] Timon's House. Rowe.

[2340] _master steward_] _M. steward_ F1. _good master steward_ Pope.

[2341] _me_] _it_ Hanmer. om. Capell.

[2342] _I am ... backs_] S. Walker would end the lines _noble ...
friend ... go ... backs._

[2343] _do_] om. Hanmer.

[2344] _From our ... to his_] _From our ... from his_ Hanmer. _To
our ... from his_ Rann (Mason conj.).

[2345] _his familiars_] _the familiars_ S. Walker conj.

[2346] _leave_] _and leave_ Long MS.

[2347] _all-shunn'd_] Hyphened in Pope.

[2348] _like_] _likes_ F2.

[2349] _still_] om. Pope.

[2350] _dying_] _sinking_ Keightley conj.

[2351] _this_] _the_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2352] _let's shake_] _shake_ Pope.

[2353] [Servants ...] Embrace and part severall wayes. Ff. He gives
them mony, they embrace ... Pope. Embrace, and Exeunt Servants. Capell.

[2354] _fierce_] _first_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[2355] _Who would_] _Who'd_ Pope.

_or to_] _as to_ Rowe. _and so_ or _so to_ Grant White conj.
(withdrawn). _or would_ Keightley. _or so_ Dyce, ed. 2.

[2356] _friendship? To have his_] _friendship? and to have His_ Singer
(ed. 2). _friendship; and revive To have his_ Collier (Collier MS.).
_friendship? and survive To have his_ Keightley.

[2357] _what state compounds_] _state comprehends_ Collier (S. Walker
conj.). _that state compounds_ Grant White conj.

[2358] _varnish'd_] _vanish'd_ Pope.

[2359] _unusual blood_,] _unusual mood_, Johnson conj. _unequal blood_,
Becket conj. _unusual!--'sblood!_ Jackson conj.

[2360] _does_] F4. _do_ F1 F3. _doe_ F2.

[2361] _Alas_] _'Las_ S. Walker conj.

[2362] _ingrateful_] _ingratefull_ F1 F2. _ungrateful_ F3 F4.

[2363] _Of monstrous ... it._] As in Pope. Three lines in Ff.

[2364] _has_] _his_ F2.

_with him_] om. Rowe.

[2365] _follow_] _follow after_ Hanmer.

[2366] SCENE III.] Rowe.

Woods ...] Edd. The Woods. Rowe. Wood; a Cave in View. Capell.

[2367] Enter Timon ...] Edd. Enter Timon in the Woods. Ff. Enter Timon.
Rowe. Enter Timon, with a Spade. Capell.

[2368] _blessed breeding_] _blessing-breeding_ Warburton.
_blessed-breeding_ Dyce (S. Walker conj.).

[2369] _dividant_] _divided_ Hanmer.

_them_] om. Pope.

[2370] _not nature_] _not ev'n nature_ Pope. _not his nature_ Capell.
_not those natures_ Steevens conj.

[2371] _nature ... nature_] _natures ... natures_ Mason conj.

[2372] _by_] _with_ Hanmer.

[2373] _Raise_] _Robe_ Maginn conj.

_deny 't_] _denude_ Theobald (Warburton). _degrade_ Hanmer. _deprive_
Heath conj. _devest_ Steevens conj. _dechute_ Becket conj. _decline_
Collier (Collier MS.). _demit_ Staunton ('Obelus,' N. and Q. 1856,
conj.). _deject_ Arrowsmith conj. _deknight_ Anon. conj.

[2374] _senator_] Rowe. _senators_ Ff.

[2375] _pasture_] Rowe. _pastour_ F1. _pastor_ F2 F3 F4. _pasterer_
Farmer and Steevens conj.

_pasture ... rother's_] _paste o'erlards the brother's_ Jackson conj.

_lards_] owe. _Lards_, F1. _Lords_, F2 F3 F4.

_rother's_] Collier (Singer, ed. 2). _Brothers_ Ff. _beggar's_ Rowe.
_weather's_ Theobald (Warburton). _broader_ Farmer conj. _breather's_
Malone conj. (withdrawn).

[2376] _The ... lean_] F3 F4. _The ... leaue_ F1. _The ... leane_ F2.
_'Tis ... leave_ Johnson conj. _The gaunt that makes him leave_
Farmer conj. Johnson supposes that a line is lost.

[2377] _say_] _fay_ F1.

_man's_] F3 F4. _mans_ F1 F2.

[2378] _grise_] _grize_ Ff. _greeze_ Pope.

[2379] _all is oblique_] Pope. _All's obliquie_ F1. _Alls obliquy_ F2
F3. _All's obliquy_ F4. _all's obloquy_ Rowe. _all, all's oblique_
Lettsom conj.

[2380] _Therefore_] _Then_ Pope.

[2381] _fang_] Johnson. _phang_ Ff.

[Digging.] Digging the Earth. Rowe. om. Ff.

[2382] _Gold ... valiant_] As in Hanmer. Five lines, ending _gold?...
votarist, ... make ... right; ... valliant,_ in Ff.

[2383] _idle votarist_] _idol votarist_ Collier (Collier MS.).

_you_] om. Hanmer.

_clear_] _dear_ Jackson conj.

[2384] _right_] After this Keightley marks an omission.

[2385] _Ha_] om. Pope.

_what_] _why_ Hanmer. _what?_ Johnson.

[2386] _stout_] _sick_ Hanmer.

_their_] F1 _the_ F2 F3 F4.

[2387] t_hieves_,] _theeves_, F1. _theeves._ F2 F3. _thieves._ F4.

[2388] _this is it_] _this, this is it_ Hanmer. _why, this it is_
Steevens conj.

[2389] _wappen'd_] _waped_ Hanmer (Warburton). _wained_ Johnson conj.
_wapper'd_ Collier, ed. 2 (Malone conj.). _Wapping_ Anon. conj. (Gent.
Mag. Vol. LX. p. 127). _weeping_ Steevens conj. _vapid_ Seymour conj.

_wed_] _woo'd_ Mason conj.

[2390] _She_] _Her_ Hanmer.

[2391] _whom ... at_] _whose ulcerous sores the spital-house
Would ... at_ or _at whose ulcerous sores the spital-house Would ... up_
Steevens conj.

[2392] _at, this_] Pope. _at. This_ Ff. _at; this_ Rowe.

[2393] _damned_] Rowe (ed. 2). _damn'd_ Ff.

[2394] _put'st_] _putt'st_ Pope. _puttes_ Ff. _puttest_ Rowe.

[2395] _Do ... quick_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2396] _thou'lt_] F4. _thou't_ F1 F2 F3.

[2397] [Keeping some gold.] Pope. om. Ff.

SCENE IV. Pope.

Phrynia] and Phrynia Ff.

[2398] _speak._] om. Seymour conj.

[2399] _The canker_] _Cankers_ Rowe.

[2400] _misanthropos_] _misantropos_ F1.

[2401] _that_] _as_ Pope.

[2402] _With ... paint_] _And with ... paint all_ Hanmer.

_gules, gules_:] _gules, total gules_: Capell. _gules, gules_; for if
Keightley.

[2403] _not_] _but_ Staunton conj.

[2404] _were_] _were now_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2405] _Noble ... man!_] Prose in Ff. Seven lines of verse in Capell.

[2406] _but to_] _but this, To_ Capell.

[2407] _not promise_] _but promise_ Staunton conj.

[2408] _perform_] _promise, and Perform_ Capell.

[2409] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[2410] _then_] _thine_ Malone conj.

[2411] _Art thou ... lust_] Three lines, ending _still!...
diseases, ... lust_, S. Walker conj.

[2412] _Be ... diet._] Verse first in Pope. Prose in Ff.

[2413] _Give ... lust._] _Leaving with thee their lust. Give them
diseases;_ Grant White (Johnson conj.).

[2414] _bring_] _bring me_ Capell (MS. correction).

[2415] _rose-cheeked youth To the_ Malone. _Rose-cheekt youth to the_
F1. _Rose-checkt youth to the_ F2 F3. _Rose-cheek'd youth to the_ F4.
_the rose-cheek'd youth To th'_ Pope. _rose-cheek'd youth to The_
Dyce.

_rose-cheeked ... tub-fast_] _the rose-cheek'd youth, Th' fub, to th'
fast_ Theobald conj.

[2416] _tub-fast_] Theobald (Warburton). _Fubfast_ Ff.

[2417] _calamities_] _calamites_ F2.

[2418] _I have_] _I have had_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[2419] _have_] om. Rowe.

[2420] _Athens_,] _Athens is_ Hanmer.

[2421] _trod upon_] _had trod on_ Hanmer.

_them--_] Rowe. _them._ Ff.

[2422] _I had_] _I 'ad_ Pope.

[2423] _Here is some_] _Here's_ Pope.

[2424] _heap--_] Rowe (ed. 2). _heape._ or _heap._ Ff.

[2425] _Athens?_] F3 F4. _Athens._ F1 F2.

[2426] _Ay ... country._] S. Walker would end the lines _them ...
when ... killing ... country._

[2427] _all_] _all then_ Pope. om. Capell, ending the line at _and._

_in thy_] _i' thy_ Steevens (1793), ending the lines _and ... Timon?...
That, ... conquer ... country._

[2428] _thee after, ... conquer'd_] _after, thee, ... conquered_ Pope.

[2429] _Why_] _But why_ Hanmer.

_of_] om. Hanmer.

[2430] _conquer my_] _make conquest of my_ Hanmer. _conquer thy own_
Capell, ending the previous line at _born_. _scourge thy_ S. Walker
conj.

[2431] _when_] F1. _whom_ F2 F3 F4.

[2432] _counterfeit_] om. Pope.

[2433] _for_] _nor_ Tyrwhitt conj.

[2434] _window-bars_] Steevens (Johnson conj.). _window barne_ F1 F2.
_window barn_ F3 F4. _window-barn_ Pope. _window-lawn_ Theobald
(Warburton). _widow's barb_ Tyrwhitt conj.

[2435] _But_] om. Pope.

_them_] om. Dyce (ed. 2).

[2436] _exhaust_] _extort_ Hanmer.

[2437] _whom_] _who_, Hanmer.

[2438] _pronounced thy_] Pope. _pronounced, the_ Ff.

[2439] _swear_] _whoso'er_ Heath conj.

_against_] _'gainst all_ Hanmer.

_objects_] _abjects_ Collier, ed. 2 (Farmer conj.). _audits_ Becket
conj.

[2440] _priests_] _priest_ Pope.

[2441] _Hast ... counsel._] As in Capell. Verse first in Pope, the
first line ending _yet?_ Prose in Ff.

[2442] _all_] om. Pope.

[2443] Phr. and Timan.] Steevens. Both. Ff. Wom. Capell.

[2444] _whores, a bawd_] Ff. _whore a bawd_ Pope. _whole a bawd_
Theobald (Warburton). _whores abundant_ Hanmer. _whores abhorr'd_
Collier (Collier MS.).

[2445] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

[2446] _And be ... still_] As in Capell. In Ff the lines end
_months ... thatch ... dead, ... matter: ... still_. Seven lines in
Johnson, ending _turncoats ... contrary ... thatch ..._ &c.

[2447] _turncoats_] _turncocks_ Jackson conj.

_pains, six months_] _pain-sick months_ Becket conj.

_six months_] _six mouths_ F2. _exterior_ Hanmer. _six months thence_
Keightley.

[2448] _contrary_] _contraried_ Johnson conj.

_and_] om. Capell.

_and thatch_] _Make false hair, and thatch_ Pope, ending lines
143-145 as Ff.

[2449] _whore_] _and whore on_ Pope.

[2450] _Believe't_] _Believe_ Rowe.

[2451] _man ... men's_] _men ... their_ S. Walker conj.

[2452] _spurring_] _sparring_ Hanmer. _spurning_ Long MS. _springing_
Seymour conj.

[2453] _hoar_] _hoarse_ Singer, ed. 1 (Upton conj.).

[2454] _scolds_] Rowe. _scold'st_ Ff.

[2455] _to foresee, Smells from_] _not foresees, Smels for_ Capell.

[2456] _foresee_] _forefend_ Warburton.

[2457] _bald_] _Quite bald_ Hanmer, ending lines 158, 159 _ruffians ...
of_.

[2458] _all_] _all of them_ Keightley. _all; plague all_ Anon. conj.

[2459] _More ... again_] Verse in Pope. Prose in Ff.

[2460] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[2461] _did thee_] _did the_ F2.

[2462] _Men ... thee._] As in Dyce. In Ff the first line ends _away_.
In Delius, _find it_.

[2463] _it_] _it such_ Steevens. _it so_ Keightley.

_Get thee away_] _Get thee hence away_ Pope, ending the line as Ff.
_Get thee hence. Away_ Johnson. _Hence; Get thee away_ Capell, ending
the line at _Hence_.

[2464] _Strike_] Put in a separate line by Steevens (1793).

[Drum beats.] Johnson. om. Ff.

[2465] Exeunt....] Theobald. Exeunt. Ff.

[2466] SCENE V. Pope.

[2467] [Digging.] Johnson, before line 174. om. Ff.

[2468] _whose_] _oh thou! whose_ Pope.

_mettle_] _forming mettle_ Keightley.

[2469] _crisp_] _cript_ Warburton.

[2470] _thy human_] Pope. _the humane_ Ff. _the human_ Rowe.

_doth_] Capell. _do_ Ff. _do's_ Rowe.

[2471] [digs. Capell.

[2472] _Ensear_] _Then sear_ Hanmer.

_conceptious_] F1. _conceptions_ F2 F3 F4.

[2473] _out_] _out to_ Warburton.

[2474] _marbled_] _marble_ Capell.

_mansion all_] _mansion-hall_ S. Walker conj.

[2475] _thy_] _your_ Singer conj.

_marrows, vines, and_] F3 F4. _marrowes, vines, and_ F1 F2. _marrows,
veins, and_ Rowe. _meadows, vineyards_, Hanmer. _harrow'd veins, and_
Warburton. _marrow'd veins, and_ Heath conj. _meadows, vines, and_
Collier (Collier MS.). _marrowy vines and_ Grant White (Dyce conj.).
_married vines and_ Keightley.

[2476] _unctuous_] Johnson. _unctious_ Ff.

_pure_] _impure_ Keightley.

[2477] _slips!_] _slippes--_ F1 F2. _slips--_ F3 F4.

[2478] SCENE VI. Pope.

[2479] _infected_] _affected_ Rowe.

[2480] _fortune_] Rowe and Southern MS. _future_ Ff. _fauturs_ Becket
conj.

[2481] _diseased_] F2 F3 F4. _diseas'd_ F1.

[2482] _woods_] _weeds_ Theobald (Warburton).

[2483] _off_] _of_ F2.

[2484] _bade_] _bad_ F1. _bid_ F2 F3 F4.

[2485] _Were_] _Where_ F2.

[2486] _Thou hast_] _Thou 'ast_ Pope. _Thou'st_ Theobald.

[2487] _A madman so long_] _So long a mad-man_ Pope.

_think'st_] _think'st thou_ Pope.

[2488] _moss'd_] Hanmer. _moyst_ F1 F2. _moist_ F3 F4.

[2489] _when_] _where_ Grant White (S. Walker conj.).

[2490] _find--_] Rowe. _finde._ F1 F2. _find._ F3 F4.

[2491] _thee_] _the_ F2.

[2492] Apem. _Why?_ Tim.] Omitted by Hanmer.

_Why?_] _Why so?_ Keightley.

[2493] _To_] _Only to_ Hanmer.

[2494] _a knave too?_] _a knave thou!_ Hanmer. _and know't too?_
Warburton conj.

[2495] _sour-cold_] Hyphen added by Steevens (1793).

[2496] _courtier_] F1 F4. _countier_ F2 F3.

_again_] om. Pope.

[2497] _Outlives incertain_] Rowe. _Out-lives: incertaine_ F1.
_Out-lives: in certaine_ F2. _Out-lives: in certain_ F3 F4.
_Out-strips incertain_ Hanmer. _Out-vies uncertain_ Capell.

_before_] _before it_ Hanmer.

[2498] _state ... Hath_] _states ... Have_ Pope.

[2499] _but bred_] _bred but_ Hanmer.

[2500] _The_] _Through_ Rowe.

[2501] _drugs_] F4. _drugges_ F1 F2. _druggs_ F3. _drudges_ Delius
(Mason conj.). _dugs_ Collier (Collier MS.). _dregs_ Capell conj. MS.

[2502] _command_] Rowe. _command'st_ Ff.

[2503] _follow'd_] Capell. _followed_ Ff.

[2504] _and hearts_] F1 F2. _the hearts_ F3 F4.

[2505] _employment_] F1. _employments_ F2 F3 F4. Here Keightley marks a
line omitted.

[2506] _me_] F1. _the_ F2. _thee_ F3 F4.

[2507] _have ... Fell ... and_] _yet ... Fall'n ... have_ Hanmer.
_and ... Fell ... and_ Capell. _and ... Fall'n ... have_ Capell (MS.
correction).

[2508] _Fell_] _Fall'n_ Rowe.

[2509] _some_] _sume_ F2.

[2510] _rag_] F4. _ragge_ F1 F2 F3. _rogue_ Collier, ed. 2 (Johnson
conj.).

[2511] _rogue_] _rag_ Anon. conj.

[2512] _a knave_] _knave_ Pope.

[2513] _I ... prodigal._] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[2514] [Eating....] Rowe. om. Ff.

[2515] _Here ... were._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[2516] _I will_] _will I_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[Offering....] Offering him another. Johnson. Throwing him a crust.
Capell. Offering him something. Steevens (1778).

[2517] _my_] Rowe. _thy_ Ff.

[2518] _mine_] _my_ Pope.

[2519] _o' nights_] Theobald. _a nights_ Ff.

[2520] _Under ... Apemantus?_] Prose in Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _me_, in Ff.

_o' days_] _a-dayes_ F1 F2. _a daies_ F3 F4.

[2521] _or_] om. Hanmer, ending the lines _Where ... it ... mind!...
dishes_.

[2522] _and_] om. Hanmer.

[2523] _it_] _it then_ Hanmer.

[2524] _curiosity_] _courtesy_ Hanmer.

[2525] _There's ... dog._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[2526] _Ay, though it look_] _I, though it looke_ Ff (look F3 F4). _I
thought it look'd_ Johnson conj. _Ay, for it looks_ Rann. _Ay, troth,
it looks_ Becket conj.

[2527] _An_] Pope. _And_ Ff.

_thou hadst_] Capell. _th' hadst_ Ff.

[2528] _and_] _or_ Pope.

_beasts?_] Rowe (ed. 2). _beasts._ Ff.

[2529] _the lion_] _a lion_ Pope.

[2530] _thou livedst_] _thou liv'st._ Rowe. _thou 'dst live_ Hanmer.

[2531] _remotion_] _motion_ Grant White conj.

[2532] _that seest_] _and seest_ Rowe.

[2533] _If ... beasts._] Prose in Pope. Five lines, ending _me ...
might'st ... here ... become ... beasts,_ in Ff.

[2534] _city?_] Rowe (ed. 2). _citie._ or _city._ Ff.

[2535] _Yonder ... Apemantus._] Prose in Pope and Theobald. Nine
irregular lines in Ff.

[2536] _Yonder ... painter_:] Omitted by Pope, who transfers Apem.
_The plague ... Apemantus_ (346-352) to follow line 393.

[2537] _Thou ... speak'st._] As in Pope. Ten lines in Ff.

[2538] _A ... thee!_] Given to Timon by Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald).

[2539] _If ... hands._] Arranged as by Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _beate thee_; in Ff. Prose in Theobald.

[2540] _If I name thee._] Omitted by Pope.

_thee._] _thee.--_ Theobald. _thee_, Ff. _thee,--_ Capell.

[2541] _I'll_] _I'd_ Hanmer.

[2542] _I ... off!_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2543] _Away ... thee._ As in Rowe. The lines end _dog ... me ...
thee,_ in Ff.

[2544] _Swoon_] Pope. _swoond_ F1 F2. _swound_ F3 F4.

[2545] _Would_] _I would_ Hanmer.

[2546] _Would ... rogue!_] As in Ff. Three lines, ending _burst ...
sorry I ... rogue!_ in Hanmer. Capell ends the lines _Away!...
lose ... rogue!_

[2547] Throws ...] Throwing at him. Capell. om. Ff.

[2548] _Rogue, rogue, rogue!_] _Rogue!_ Hammer.

[Apemantus retreats backward, as going. Theobald.

[2549] _even ... upon 't_] _ev'n ... upon it_ Pope.

[2550] _me_] _thee_ Johnson.

[2551] [To the gold] Looking on the gold. Pope. om. Ff.

_king-killer_] _kin-killer_ Maginn conj.

[2552] _son and sire_] Rowe. _Sunne and fire_ F1 F2 F3. _Sun and
Fire_ F4.

[2553] _fresh, loved_] _fresh-lived_ Maginn conj. _fresh-loved_ Anon.
conj.

[2554] _That ... god_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[2555] _slave man_] Rowe. _slave-man_ Ff.

[2556] Apem.] Apem. [advancing. Capell.

[2557] _thou hast_] Pope (ed. 2). _th' hast_ Ff. _thou 'st_ Collier.

[2558] _to ... to_] Rowe (ed. 2). _too ... too_ Ff.

[2559] _Live ... misery!_] Continued to Timon by Hanmer.

[2560] _Long ... quit_] Given to Apem. Malone conj.

_and so_] _or so_ Hanmer.

Exit Apemantus.] Dyce. After _quit._ Capell. Exit Apeman. (after line
393) Ff.

_die ... I_] _die, so I_ Hanmer. _dye!--So, I_ Capell.

[2561] _Moe ... them._] Continued to Timon by Hanmer. Given to
Apemantus in Ff. One line in Hanmer. Prose in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

_Moe_] _Mo_ Ff. _More_ Johnson.

_them._] Rowe. _then._ Ff. _Here_ Pope and Hanmer insert lines 346-352,
Apem. _The plague ... Apemantus._

[Seeing the Thieves. Hanmer.

Enter Banditti.] Enter the Bandetti. F1 F2 F3. Enter the Banditti. F4.
Enter Thieves. Pope. Enter certain Thieves. Capell.

[2562] SCENE VII. Pope.

First Ban.] 1 Band. Rowe. 1 Thief. Pope. 1. Ff (and elsewhere).

[2563] _falling-from of his_] Capell. _falling from of his_ Ff.
_falling off of_ Pope. _falling from him of his_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[2564] Sec. Ban.] 2 Band. Rowe. 2 Thief. Pope. 2. Ff (and elsewhere).

_It is ... treasure._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

_hath_] _hoth_ F2.

[2565] _True ... hid._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[2566] Banditti.] Knight. All. Ff.

[2567] _He_;] Rowe. _He?_ Ff.

[2568] _thieves?_] Capell. _thieves._ Ff. _thieves!_ Hanmer.

[2569] _Both too_] _Both, both_ Hanmer. _Both two_ Collier (ed. 2).
_Both the two_ Anon. conj.

_Both ... sons_] _Both, and women's sons too_ Anon. conj.

[2570] _We ... want._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[2571] _want is ... meat._] _want? Is your want much of meat?_ Heath
conj. _want is much, you want. O men_, Anon. conj.

_want much_] _wont much_ F2.

[2572] _much of meat. Why_] _much.--Of meat Why_ Rann (Farmer conj.).

[2573] _meat_] _meet_ Theobald. _men_ Hanmer. _me_ Steevens conj.

[2574] _a hundred_] F1 F2. _an hundred_ F3 F4.

[2575] _mast_] _masts_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_hips_] _heps_ F1.

[2576] _Rascal thieves_] _Rascals, thieves_ Pope.

[2577] _froth_] _broth_ Pope.

[2578] _Moe_] _More_ F4.

_take ... lives_] F1. _take ... live_ F2 F3 F4. _takes ... life_
Hanmer. _take ... rob_ Long MS.

[2579] _villany_] Rowe. _villaine_ F1 F2. _villain_ F3 F4.

_protest_] _profess_ Theobald.

[2580] _do't, Like workmen._] _do't, Like workmen_; Pope. _doo't.
Like workemen_, F1 F2. _do't, Like workmen_, F3 F4.

[2581] _vast_] _daste_ F2 (Long's copy). _chaste_ Long MS.

[2582] _moon_] _mounds_ Theobald. _earth_ Capell. _main_ Tollet conj.
_marge_ or _mole_ Anon. conj.

[2583] _composture_] _composure_ Pope.

[2584] _excrement_] _excrements_Theobald.

_thing's_] _think's_ F2.

[2585] _Have_] Pope. _Ha's_ Ff.

[2586] _Cut throats_] _cut-throats_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. Vol. LX. p.
307).

[2587] _nothing_] _for nothing_ Pope. _where nothing_ Steevens conj.
_nought_ S. Walker conj., ending lines 443-446 _thieves ... give
you ... Amen_.

[2588] _But ... Amen_] As in Capell. Two lines, the first ending _give
you_, in Ff. Three, ending _this ... give you ... Amen_, in Delius.

[2589] _not_] Rowe. om. Ff. _no_ Collier (Collier MS.). _not the_
Keightley.

[2590] _for this I give you_] _for what I give_ Pope, ending line 444
at _what._

[2591] _howsoe'er_] _howsoever_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2592] [Exit. Rowe. Retiring towards his Cave. Capell. om. Ff.

[2593] _Has_] F1 F2. _H'as_ F3 F4. _He has_ Steevens.

[2594] _the malice of_] _his malice to_ Hanmer.

[2595] _us; not_] _us, not_ Rowe. _us not_ Ff.

[2596] _I'll ... trade_] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[2597] _there is ... true._] Given to '2 Thief' by Theobald (Warburton).

[2598] [Exeunt ...] Exit Theeves. F1. Exeunt Thieves. F2 F3 F4.

Enter Flavius.] Enter the Steward to Timon. Ff.

[2599] ACT V. SCENE I. The Woods and Timon's Cave. Rowe. Capell
continues the Scene.

[2600] _Full ... bestow'd_] As in Ff. Three lines, ending _failing?...
deeds, ... bestow'd,_ in Johnson.

[2601] _What ... made!_] As in Malone. One line in Ff. _What change
of honour desp'rate want has made?_ Pope. _What change of humour
desp'rate want has made?_ Warburton. Steevens ends the first line at
_has_.

[2602] _What_] _Why, what_ Capell. _Ah, what_ Anon. conj.

_honour_] _favour_ Anon. conj.

[2603] _viler_] Pope. _vilder_ Ff.

[2604] _wish'd_] _will'd_ Warburton.

[2605] _woo ... do_] _too, ... woo_ Warburton.

[2606] _mischief_] _miscreefe_ F2.

[2607] _Has_] _H'as_ F4. _He has_ Steevens.

[2608] _present ... life._] As in Pope. Prose in F1 F2. Two lines, the
first ending _grief_, in F3 F4.

[2609] _unto_] _to_ Pope.

[2610] [Timon comes forward from his cave. Theobald.

[2611] _thou_] om. S. Walker conj.

[2612] _dost_] _dost thou_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[2613] _Then ... thee_] As in Capell. Two lines in Ff.

_grant'st ... I_] Capell, and Southern MS. _grunt'st, th'art a man.
I_ F1. _grunt'st th'art a man, I_ F2 F3 F4. _grantest that thou art a
man I_, ending the line at _man_, Pope. _grant'st thou'rt man, I_
Steevens (1793).

_I have_] _I've_ Capell.

[2614] _An ... yours_] _An honest servant_ Pope.

[2615] _Then_] _Nay, then_ Capell, ending the lines at _then ...
man ... knaves._ Steevens (1793) reads _Then_, but follows Capell's
arrangement.

[2616] _never_] F1 F2. _nev'r_ F3 F4. _ne'er_ Rowe.

_man_] _men_ S. Walker conj.

_me, I; all_] Steevens (1778). _me, I all_, F1 F2 F3. _me, I, all_ F4.
_me, all_ Pope. _me; ay, all_ Delius.

[2617] _I kept_] _that I kept_ Capell.

[2618] _Ne'er_] Pope. _Nev'r_ F1 F2. _Never_ F3 F4.

_steward_] _steward's_ Capell conj.

[2619] _What ... thee_] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

[2620] _thorough_] _thorow_ F1 F2. _through_ F3 F4. _or through_ Pope.

_and_] _or_ Pope.

_laughter. Pity's sleeping_:] _laughter, pity sleeping._ Johnson conj.

[2621] _Pity's ... weeping!_] Put in the margin by Hanmer.

[2622] _Had ... woman._] As in Ff. Four lines in Capell, ending
_just, ... turns ... behold ... woman._ Malone ends the first line at
_now_, following Capell's arrangement in the rest.

[2623] _steward_] _steward then_ Capell.

[2624] _dangerous ... mild_] _nature dangerous-wild_ Becket conj.
_dolorous nature wild_ Jackson conj.

_mild_] Hanmer (Thirlby conj.). _wilde_ Ff.

[2625] _You_] om. Pope.

_perpetual-sober_] Hanmer. _perpetuall sober_ Ff.

[2626] _One ... steward_] S. Walker would end the lines _man:-- ...
pray,-- ... steward._

[2627] _pray_] _say_ Lettsom conj.

_pray ... steward_] _pray ... steward too_ Hanmer. _pray you,--and he
is a steward_ Capell.

[2628] _subtle, covetous_] _subtle-covetous_ S. Walker conj.

[2629] _If not a_] _Is't not a_ Rowe. _A_ Pope. _An_ Hanmer. _Is it not
a_ Keightley, ending the line at _men_.

_kindness_] om. Seymour conj.

_and_] om. Pope.

_rich ... gifts_] _gifts That rich men deal_ Anon. conj.

_gifts_] _Gifts to catch gifts_ S. Walker conj., ending the lines
_deal ... return._

[2630] _where_] _when_ Hanmer.

[2631] _unmatched_] _unmarched_ F2.

[2632] _and_] _And, O_ Capell, ending the lines _living ... lord._

[2633] _My ... lord_,] Omitted by Pope.

[2634] _My ... yourself._] Four lines in Keightley, ending
_benefit, ... I'd ... power ... yourself._

[2635] _exchange_] _exchange it_ Hanmer. _exchange't_ Capell.

[2636] _thee_] F1 F3 F4. _the_ F2. _ye_ Capell.

[2637] _Have_] Rowe. _Ha's_ Ff. _Ha'_ Anon. conj.

_thee_] _the_ F2.

[2638] _deniest_] _denyest_ Ff. _deny'st_ Rowe.

[2639] _'em to nothing_] _'em_ Pope. _them to nothing_ Malone. _them_
Steevens (1793).

[2640] _O ... master_] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[2641] _If ... free_:] As in Ff. Malone ends the first line at _hat'st_.

[2642] _fly_] _flye_ F1 F2. _flee_ F3 F4. _but fly_ Pope. _fly, fly_ or
_fly now_ Anon. conj.

[2643] [Exeunt severally.] Theobald. Exit. Ff. Exeunt. Rowe. Exit
Flavius; and Timon into his cave. Collier (Collier MS.).




ACT V.


SCENE I. _The woods. Before Timon's cave._[2644]

 _Enter_ Poet _and_ Painter; TIMON _watching them from his cave_.[2645]

    _Pain._ As I took note of the place, it cannot be far[2646][2647]
    where he abides.[2646]

    _Poet._ What's to be thought of him? does the rumour[2648]
    hold for true, that he's so full of gold?[2648]

    _Pain._ Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and
        Timandra[2648][2649]                                           5
    had gold of him: he likewise enriched poor straggling[2648]
    soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said he gave unto[2648]
    his steward a mighty sum.[2648]

    _Poet._ Then this breaking of his has been but a try for[2648][2650]
    his friends.[2648]                                                10

    _Pain._ Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens[2648]
    again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore 'tis not amiss[2648]
    we tender our loves to him in this supposed distress of his:[2648]
    it will show honestly in us, and is very likely to load our[2648]
    purposes with what they travail for, if it be a just and
        true[2648][2651]                                              15
    report that goes of his having.[2648]

    _Poet._ What have you now to present unto him?[2648]

    _Pain._ Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I[2648]
    will promise him an excellent piece.[2648]

    _Poet._ I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent[2648]      20
    that's coming toward him.[2648]

    _Pain._ Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the[2648][2652]
    time: it opens the eyes of expectation: performance is ever[2648]
    the duller for his act; and, but in the plainer and simpler[2648]
    kind of people, the deed of saying is quite out of use.
        To[2648][2653]                                                25
    promise is most courtly and fashionable: performance is a[2648]
    kind of will or testament which argues a great sickness in[2648]
    his judgement that makes it.[2648][2654]

                                   [_Timon comes from his cave, behind._

    _Tim._ [_Aside_] Excellent workman! thou canst not[2648]
    paint a man so bad as is thyself.[2648][2655]                     30

    _Poet._ I am thinking what I shall say I have provided[2648]
    for him: it must be a personating of himself; a satire against[2648]
    the softness of prosperity, with a discovery of the infinite[2648]
    flatteries that follow youth and opulency.[2648]

    _Tim._ [_Aside_] Must thou needs stand for a villain in[2648]     35
    thine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults in other[2648]
    men? Do so, I have gold for thee.[2648]

    _Poet._ Nay, let's seek him:[2656]
    Then do we sin against our own estate,[2656]
    When we may profit meet, and come too late.[2656]                 40

    _Pain._ True;[2656]
    When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,[2656][2657]
    Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light.[2656]
    Come.[2656][2658]

    _Tim._ [_Aside_] I'll meet you at the turn. What a god's
        gold,[2659]                                                   45
    That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple[2659][2660]
    Than where swine feed![2659][2661]
    'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plough'st the foam,[2662]
    Settlest admired reverence in a slave:
    To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye[2663][2664]            50
    Be crown'd with plagues, that thee alone obey![2664]
    Fit I meet them.[2665]          [_Coming forward._

    _Poet._ Hail, worthy Timon!

    _Pain._                      Our late noble master!

    _Tim._ Have I once lived to see two honest men?[2666]

    _Poet._ Sir,                                                      55
    Having often of your open bounty tasted,[2667]
    Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
    Whose thankless natures--O abhorred spirits!--[2668]
    Not all the whips of heaven are large enough--[2669]
    What! to you,[2670]                                               60
    Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence
    To their whole being! I am rapt, and cannot cover[2671][2672]
    The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude[2672]
    With any size of words.

    _Tim._ Let it go naked, men may see't the better:[2673]           65
    You that are honest, by being what you are,
    Make them best seen and known.[2674]

    _Pain._                          He and myself
    Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,[2675]
    And sweetly felt it.

    _Tim._               Ay, you are honest men.[2676]

    _Pain_. We are hither come to offer you our service.[2677]        70

    _Tim._ Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?[2678]
    Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.

    _Both._ What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.[2679]

    _Tim._ Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold;[2679][2680]
    I am sure you have: speak truth; ye're honest men.[2681]          75

    _Pain._ So it is said, my noble lord: but therefore
    Came not my friend nor I.[2682]

    _Tim._ Good honest men! Thou draw'st a counterfeit[2683]
    Best in all Athens: thou'rt indeed the best;[2684]
    Thou counterfeit'st most lively.

    _Pain._                          So, so, my lord.                 80

    _Tim._ E'en so, sir, as I say. And, for thy fiction,[2685]
    Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
    That thou art even natural in thine art.
    But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,[2686]
    I must needs say you have a little fault:                         85
    Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you; neither wish I[2687]
    You take much pains to mend.

    _Both._                      Beseech your honour
    To make it known to us.

    _Tim._                  You'll take it ill.

    _Both._ Most thankfully, my lord.

    _Tim._                            Will you, indeed?

    _Both._ Doubt it not, worthy lord.                                90

    _Tim._ There's never a one of you but trusts a knave[2688]
    That mightily deceives you.

    _Both._                     Do we, my lord?

    _Tim._ Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,[2689]
    Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,[2690]
    Keep in your bosom: yet remain assured[2691]                      95
    That he's a made-up villain.

    _Pain._ I know none such, my lord.

    _Poet._                            Nor I.[2692]

    _Tim._ Look you, I love you well; I'll give you gold,[2693]
    Rid me these villains from your companies:
    Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,[2694]           100
    Confound them by some course, and come to me,
    I'll give you gold enough.

    _Both._ Name them, my lord, let's know them.

    _Tim._ You that way, and you this, but two in company:[2695]
    Each man apart, all single and alone,[2696]                      105
    Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
    If, where thou art, two villains shall not be,[2697]
    Come not near him. If thou wouldst not reside[2698]
    But where one villain is, then him abandon.
    Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves:[2699]   110
    [_To Painter_] You have work for me, there's payment: hence![2700]
    [_To Poet_] You are an alchemist, make gold of that:
    Out, rascal dogs!

               [_Beats them out, and then retires into his cave._[2701]

                  _Enter_ FLAVIUS _and two_ Senators.

    _Flav._ It is in vain that you would speak with Timon;[2702]
    For he is set so only to himself                                 115
    That nothing but himself which looks like man
    Is friendly with him.

    _First Sen._          Bring us to his cave:
    It is our part and promise to the Athenians[2703]
    To speak with Timon.

    _Sec. Sen._          At all times alike
    Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs                120
    That framed him thus: time, with his fairer hand,
    Offering the fortunes of his former days,
    The former man may make him. Bring us to him,
    And chance it as it may.[2704]

    _Flav._                  Here is his cave.
    Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon![2705]              125
    Look out, and speak to friends: the Athenians
    By two of their most reverend senate greet thee:
    Speak to them, noble Timon.[2706]

                      _TIMON comes from his cave._

    _Tim._ Thou sun, that comfort'st, burn! Speak, and be hang'd:[2707]
    For each true word, a blister! and each false                    130
    Be as a cauterizing to the root o' the tongue,[2708]
    Consuming it with speaking!

    _First Sen._                Worthy Timon,--

    _Tim._ Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.[2709]

    _First Sen._ The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.

    _Tim._ I thank them, and would send them back the plague,[2710]  135
    Could I but catch it for them.

    _First Sen._                   O, forget
    What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
    The senators with one consent of love
    Entreat thee back to Athens; who have thought
    On special dignities, which vacant lie                           140
    For thy best use and wearing.

    _Sec. Sen._                   They confess
    Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:[2711]
    Which now the public body, which doth seldom[2712]
    Play the recanter, feeling in itself
    A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal[2713]                   145
    Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon;[2714]
    And send forth us, to make their sorrowed render.[2715]
    Together with a recompense more fruitful[2716]
    Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;[2717][2718]
    Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth,[2718]           150
    As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs,[2718]
    And write in thee the figures of their love,[2719]
    Ever to read them thine.

    _Tim._                   You witch me in it,
    Surprise me to the very brink of tears:
    Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,                       155
    And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

    _First Sen._ Therefore, so please thee to return with us,
    And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
    The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
    Allow'd with absolute power, and thy good name[2720]             160
    Live with authority: so soon we shall drive back[2721]
    Of Alcibiades the approaches wild;[2722]
    Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
    His country's peace.

    _Sec. Sen._          And shakes his threatening sword
    Against the walls of Athens.

    _First Sen._                 Therefore, Timon,--[2723]           165

    _Tim._ Well, sir, I will; therefore, I will, sir; thus:[2724]
    If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
    Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
    That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,[2725]
    And take our goodly aged men by the beards,                      170
    Giving our holy virgins to the stain
    Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war;
    Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
    In pity of our aged and our youth,
    I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,[2726]             175
    And let him take 't at worst; for their knives care not,
    While you have throats to answer: for myself,
    There's not a whittle in the unruly camp,[2727]
    But I do prize it at my love before[2728]
    The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you[2729]           180
    To the protection of the prosperous gods,[2730]
    As thieves to keepers.

    _Flav._                Stay not; all's in vain.

    _Tim._ Why, I was writing of my epitaph;[2731]
    It will be seen to-morrow: my long sickness
    Of health and living now begins to mend,                         185
    And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still;
    Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
    And last so long enough!

    _First Sen._             We speak in vain.

    _Tim._ But yet I love my country, and am not
    One that rejoices in the common wreck,[2732]                     190
    As common bruit doth put it.[2733]

    _First Sen._                 That's well spoke.

    _Tim._ Commend me to my loving countrymen,--[2734]

    _First Sen._ These words become your lips as they pass thorough
        them.[2735]

    _Sec. Sen._ And enter in our ears like great triumphers
    In their applauding gates.

    _Tim._                     Commend me to them;                   195
    And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
    Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,[2736]
    Their pangs of love, with other incident throes[2737]
    That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
    In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do
        them:[2738][2739]                                            200
    I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.[2739][2740]

    _First Sen._ I like this well; he will return again.[2741]

    _Tim._ I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
    That mine own use invites me to cut down,
    And shortly must I fell it: tell my friends,                     205
    Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree[2742]
    From high to low throughout, that whoso please
    To stop affliction, let him take his haste,[2743]
    Come hither ere my tree hath felt the axe,
    And hang himself: I pray you, do my greeting.                    210

    _Flav._ Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.[2744]

    _Tim._ Come not to me again: but say to Athens,
    Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
    Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
    Who once a day with his embossed froth[2745]                     215
    The turbulent surge shall cover: thither come,
    And let my grave-stone be your oracle.
    Lips, let sour words go by and language end:[2746]
    What is amiss, plague and infection mend!
    Graves only be men's works, and death their gain!                220
    Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.[2747]

                                                 [_Retires to his cave._

    _First Sen._ His discontents are unremoveably[2748][2749]
    Coupled to nature.[2748][2750]

    _Sec. Sen._ Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
    And strain what other means is left unto us                      225
    In our dear peril.[2751]

    _First Sen._ It requires swift foot.                      [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Before the walls of Athens._[2752]

             _Enter two_ Senators _and a_ Messenger.[2753]

    _First Sen._ Thou hast painfully discover'd: are his files
    As full as thy report?[2754]

    _Mess._                I have spoke the least:
    Besides, his expedition promises[2755]
    Present approach.[2755]

    _Sec. Sen._ We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.         5

    _Mess._ I met a courier, one mine ancient friend;[2756]
    Whom, though in general part we were opposed,[2757]
    Yet our old love made a particular force,[2758]
    And made us speak like friends: this man was riding[2759]
    From Alcibiades to Timon's cave,                                  10
    With letters of entreaty, which imported
    His fellowship i' the cause against your city,
    In part for his sake moved.[2760]

    _First Sen._                Here come our brothers.

                     _Enter_ Senators _from_ TIMON.

    _Third Sen._ No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.[2761]
    The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring[2762]            15
    Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:
    Ours is the fall, I fear, our foes the snare.[2763]       [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _The woods. Timon's cave, and a rude tomb seen._[2764]

               _Enter a_ Soldier, _seeking_ TIMON.[2765]

    _Sold._ By all description this should be the place.
    Who's here? speak, ho! No answer! What is this?[2766]
    Timon is dead, who hath outstretch'd his span:[2767]
    Some beast read this; there does not live a man.[2768]
    Dead, sure; and this his grave. What's on this tomb[2769]          5
    I cannot read; the character I'll take with wax:[2769]
    Our captain hath in every figure skill,
    An aged interpreter, though young in days:
    Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
    Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.                 [_Exit._  10


SCENE IV. _Before the walls of Athens._[2770]

      _Trumpets sound. Enter_ ALCIBIADES _with his powers_.[2771]

    _Alcib._ Sound to this coward and lascivious town
    Our terrible approach.[2772]   [_A parley sounded._

                _Enter_ Senators _upon the walls_.[2773]

    Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time
    With all licentious measure, making your wills
    The scope of justice; till now myself and such                     5
    As slept within the shadow of your power
    Have wander'd with our traversed arms and breathed
    Our sufferance vainly: now the time is flush,
    When crouching marrow in the bearer strong[2774]
    Cries of itself 'No more:' now breathless wrong                   10
    Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
    And pursy insolence shall break his wind
    With fear and horrid flight.

    _First Sen._                 Noble and young,
    When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
    Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,[2775]               15
    We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,
    To wipe out our ingratitude with loves[2776]
    Above their quantity.[2777]

    _Sec. Sen._           So did we woo
    Transformed Timon to our city's love
    By humble message and by promised means:[2778]                    20
    We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
    The common stroke of war.

    _First Sen._              These walls of ours
    Were not erected by their hands from whom
    You have received your griefs: nor are they such[2779]
    That these great towers, trophies and schools should fall         25
    For private faults in them.

    _Sec. Sen._                 Nor are they living
    Who were the motives that you first went out;[2780]
    Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess
    Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,[2781]
    Into our city with thy banners spread:                            30
    By decimation and a tithed death--
    If thy revenges hunger for that food
    Which nature loathes--take thou the destined tenth,
    And by the hazard of the spotted die
    Let die the spotted.[2782]

    _First Sen._         All have not offended;[2782][2783]           35
    For those that were, it is not square to take,[2784]
    On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,[2785]
    Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
    Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:
    Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin                           40
    Which, in the bluster of thy wrath, must fall
    With those that have offended: like a shepherd
    Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,
    But kill not all together.[2786]

    _Sec. Sen._                What thou wilt,
    Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile                       45
    Than hew to 't with thy sword.

    _First Sen._                   Set but thy foot
    Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope;
    So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
    To say thou'lt enter friendly.[2787]

    _Sec. Sen._                    Throw thy glove,
    Or any token of thine honour else,                                50
    That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
    And not as our confusion, all thy powers
    Shall make their harbour in our town, till we
    Have seal'd thy full desire.

    _Alcib._                     Then there's my glove;
    Descend, and open your uncharged ports:[2788]                     55
    Those enemies of Timon's, and mine own,[2789]
    Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof,
    Fall, and no more: and, to atone your fears
    With my more noble meaning, not a man
    Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream                      60
    Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
    But shall be render'd to your public laws[2790]
    At heaviest answer.

    _Both._             'Tis most nobly spoken.

    _Alcib._ Descend, and keep your words.

                      [_The Senators descend, and open the gates._[2791]

                            _Enter_ Soldier.

    _Sold._ My noble general, Timon is dead;                          65
    Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea;
    And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which[2792]
    With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
    Interprets for my poor ignorance.[2793]

    _Alcib._ [_Reads_] 'Here lies a wretched corse, of wretched soul
        bereft:[2794]                                                 70
    Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked caitiffs left![2795]
    Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate:[2796]
    Pass by and curse thy fill; but pass and stay not here thy gait.'[2797]
    These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
    Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,[2798]              75
    Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our droplets which[2799]
    From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
    Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
    On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead[2800]
    Is noble Timon: of whose memory                                   80
    Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
    And I will use the olive with my sword,[2801]
    Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each
    Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
    Let our drums strike.                                 [_Exeunt._  85

FOOTNOTES:

[2644] ACT V. SCENE I.] Capell. ACT V. SCENE II. Pope. See note (XIV).

The woods ... cave.] Capell, substantially.

[2645] Enter ...] Dyce. Enter Poet and Painter. Ff. Enter ... Timon
behind unseen. Capell.

[2646] _As ... abides._] Prose in F1. Two lines, the first ending
_farre_, in F2 F3 F4.

[2647] _cannot_] _can't_ Pope.

[2648] _What's ... thee?_] Prose in Pope. Irregular lines in Ff.

[2649] _Phrynia_] Rowe (ed. 2). _Phrinica_ F1. _Phrinia_ F2 F3 F4.

_Timandra_] _Timandylo_ F1.

[2650] _try for_] _tryal for_ Pope. _tryal of_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[2651] _purposes ... they_] _purses ... we_ Collier (Collier MS.).
_purses ... they_ Keightley conj.

[2652] _best. Promising_] _best. Promising_, F1. _best Promising_, F2
F3. _best, Promising_ F4.

[2653] _of saying_] om. Pope. _of paying_ Anon. conj.

_quite_] _quiet_ F2.

[2654] [Timon ... behind.] Edd. Enter Timon from his Cave. Ff. Re-enter
Timon from his cave, unseen. Pope. Re-enter ... unseen, but overhearing
him. Hanmer. The stage direction of Ff transferred to the beginning of
the scene by Capell, who first marks Timon's speeches as 'Aside.'

[2655] _is_] om. Pope.

[2656] Poet. _Nay ... late._ Pain. _True; ... Come._] Ff. Pain.
_Nay ... late._ Poet. _True; ... Come._ Hanmer. Poet. _Nay ... late._ Pain.
_True._ Poet. _While the day ... Come._ Theobald.

[2657] _When_] _While_ Pope.

_black-corner'd_] _black-corneted_ Hanmer. _black-cornette_ Warburton
conj. _black-coroned_ Farmer conj. MS. _black-coned_ Anon. ap. Steevens
conj. _black-crowned_ Mason conj. _black correned_ Becket conj.
_dark-horned_ Jackson conj. _black-cover'd_ Collier, ed. 2 (Anon. ap.
Steevens conj.). _black-curtain'd_ Singer conj. _black-garner'd_ or
_black 'coutred_ Anon. conj.

[2658] _Come_] om. Capell.

[going towards to the Cave. Capell.

[2659] _I'll ... feed!_] As in Capell. The lines end _turne: ...
worshipt ... feede?_ in Ff.

[2660] _worshipp'd ... temple_] _worshipped In baser temples_ Pope.

[2661] _feed_] _do feed_ Pope.

[2662] _foam_] _wave_ Theobald.

[2663] _worship_] Rowe. _worshipt_ F1 F2 F3. _worship't_ F4.

[2664] _aye Be_] Rowe (ed. 2). _aye: Be_ Ff.

[2665] _Fit I_] _'Tis fit I_ Rowe. _'Fit I do_ Capell.

[Coming forward.] Puts himself in their way. Capell. Advancing. Malone.
om. Ff.

[2666] _Have ... men?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[2667] _open_] om. Rowe, reading _Sir, ... tasted_ as one line.

_tasted_] _tested_ F2.

[2668] _Whose ... spirits!--_] _For whose most thankless natures_
(_abhorr'd spirits!_) Hanmer.

[2669] _enough--_] Rowe. _enough_, F2 F3 F4. _enough_: Dyce. See note
(XV).

[2670] _to you_] _even to you_ Hanmer, ending lines 60-64
_nobleness ... I'm rapt ... this ... words._

[2671] _whole_] om. Hanmer.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[2672] _cover ... ingratitude_] As in Ff. One line in Pope.

[2673] _Let ... better_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_go naked, men_] Theobald. _go, Naked men_ Ff.

[2674] _them_] _men_ Theobald conj.

[2675] _travail'd_] F1 F2. _travel'd_ F3 F4.

_great_] om. Hanmer.

[2676] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

_men_] _man_ F1.

[2677] _We ... service_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_We are_] _We're_ Pope.

[2678] _Most ... you_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2679] _What ... gold_] Two lines in Pope. Four in Ff.

[2680] _Ye're_] Dyce. _Y'are_ Ff. _You're_ Capell. _You are_ Steevens.

_ye've_] Dyce. _Y'have_ Ff. _You've_ Rowe. _you have_ Steevens.

[2681] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_ye're_] Dyce. _y'are_ Ff. _you're_ Capell. _you are_ Steevens.

[2682] _nor_] _and_ Capell.

[2683] _men_] F1. _man_ F2 F3 F4.

[2684] _thou'rt_] Rowe. _th'art_ F1 F2. _tha'rt_ F3 F4.

[2685] [To the Poet. Hanmer.

[2686] _honest-natured_] Hyphened by Rowe.

[2687] _'tis_] om. Pope.

[2688] _never_] Ff. _ne'er_ Pope.

[2689] _Ay, ... dissemble_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[2690] _love_] _yet love_ Capell.

_feed him_] _and feed him_ Pope. _feed him, and_ Keightley.

[2691] _Keep_] _Keep him_ Heath conj.

[2692] _Nor I_] _Nor I, my lord_ Steevens conj.

[2693] _Look ... gold_,] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2694] _a draught_] F1. _draught_ F2 F3 F4. _the draught_ Rowe.

[2695] _You ... company_:] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_but_] _not_ Hanmer. _both_ Jackson conj.

_in_] _is_ Collier MS.

[2696] _apart_] F3 F4. _a part_ F1 F2.

[2697] _two villains_] _four villains_ Seymour conj.

[To the Painter. Pope.

[2698] _reside_] Rowe. _recide_ Ff.

[To the Poet. Pope.

[2699] _you_] F1. _ye_ F2 F3 F4.

[2700] [To Painter] Edd. (Globe ed.). om. Ff.

_You have work_] F3 F4. _You have worke_ F1 F2. _You have work'd_
Hanmer. _You have done work_ Malone. _You've worked_ Steevens conj.
_You have worked_ Keightley.

_there's_] Ff. _there's your_ Pope. _there is your_ Johnson. _there is_
Capell.

_payment_] _payment for ye_ Anon. conj.

_hence_] F1. _thence_ F2 F3 F4.

[To Poet] Edd. (Globe ed.). om. Ff.

[2701] [Beats....] Staunton. Beating and driving 'em out. Rowe. Exeunt.
Ff. Exit beating and driving 'em out. Hanmer.

[2702] SCENE III. Pope. SCENE II. The same. Capell.

_in_] F3 F4. om. F1 F2.

[2703] _part_] _pact_ Dyce ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2704] _chance_] F3 F4. _chanc'd_ F1. _chanc'e_ F2.

[2705] _Peace ... here!_] Spoken by one of the Senators. Staunton conj.

_Lord_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2706] Timon....] Enter Timon out of his Cave. Ff.

[2707] _Thou ... hang'd_] One line in Hanmer. Two in Ff.

_comfort'st_] Pope. _comforts_ F1. _comfort_ F2 F3 F4.

[2708] _as a cauterizing_] Rowe. _as a Cantherizing_ F1. _as a
catherizing_ F2 F3 F4. _cauterizing_ Pope. _cancerizing_ Capell. _as a
cancering_ Steevens conj. _as a cancerizing_ Rann (Steevens conj.). _as
a cauter_ Lettsom conj. See note (XVI).

_cauterizing to the_] _cancer in the_ Anon. apud Rann conj.

[2709] _Of ... Timon._] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2710] _I thank ... plague_,] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[2711] _general, gross_] Pope. _generall grosse_ Ff. _general-gross_
Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2712] _Which now_] _And now_ Hanmer. _But now_ Capell.

[2713] _sense_] _sence_ Rowe. _since_ Ff.

[2714] _its_] _it's_ Rowe. _it_ Ff.

_fail_] Capell. _fall_ Ff. _fault_ Hanmer.

_restraining_] _refraining_ Johnson conj.

[2715] _send_] Ff. _sends_ Rowe.

_sorrowed render_] Ff. _sorrowed tender_ Pope. _sorrow's tender_
Hanmer. _sorrows' tender_ Capell. _sorrow'd render._ Dyce.

[2716] _Together with_] Rowe. _Together, with_ Ff.

[2717] _weigh ... dram_;] _weigh. Down by the dram,_ Johnson.

[2718] _down ... As_] _ay, ev'n such heaps And sums of love and
wealth, down by the dram,_ As Johnson conj.

[2719] _in thee_] _instead_ Anon. conj.

[2720] _Allow'd_] Pope. _Allowed_ Ff. _Hallow'd_ Warburton.

[2721] _so_] om. Pope.

[2722] _the approaches_] _th' approaches_ F1. _h'approaches_ F2 F3 F4.

[2723] _Timon,--_] _Timon--_ Rowe. _Timon._ Ff.

[2724] _sir; thus_:] _sir; thus--_ Theobald. _sir thus_: Ff. _sir,
thus--_ Rowe.

[2725] _But_] om. Pope.

[2726] _him_,] _him,--_ Hanmer.

[2727] _whittle_] _whistle_ Becket conj.

[2728] _at_] _in_ Hanmer.

[2729] _reverend'st_] _reverends_ F1.

[2730] _prosperous_] _phosphorus_ Jackson conj.

[2731] _Why, I ... epitaph_:] _Why, I ... epitaph,_ Pope. _Why I ...
epitaph_, Ff.

[2732] _wreck_] Hanmer. _wracke_ F1 F2. _wrack_ F3 F4.

[2733] _bruit_] F3 F4. _bruite_ F1 F2. _brute_ Rowe.

[2734] _countrymen,--_] Capell. _countreymen._ Ff.

[2735] _These ... them._] One line in Pope. Prose in Ff.

_thorough_] _thorow_ Ff. _thro'_ Rowe.

_them_] om. Anon. conj.

[2736] _aches, losses_] F4. _aches losses_ F1 F2 F3.

[2737] _throes_] F4. _throwes_ F1 F2 F3.

[2738] _voyage_] _voyages_ Pope.

_I will_] _say, I will_ S. Walker conj., ending the lines _will ...
prevent ... well_.

_do them_] om. Steevens conj. _do 'em_ S. Walker conj.

[2739] _some ... teach_] _do Some kindness to them, teach_ Pope,
ending the lines _do ... prevent_.

[2740] _I'll ... to_] _I will ... How to_ Anon. conj., ending the lines
_voyage, ... them ... wrath_.

[2741] _he ... again._] Omitted by Hanmer, reading _Wild ... well_ as
one line.

[2742] _sequence_] F1. _frequence_ F2 F3 F4.

[2743] _take his_] _make_ Long MS. _make his_ Staunton conj.

_haste_] _taste_ Pope. _tatch_ Warburton conj. MS. _halter_ Collier
(Collier MS.).

[2744] _Trouble ... him_] One line in Pope. Two, the first ending
_shall_, in Ff.

_Trouble_] _Vex_ Pope.

[2745] _Who_] F1. _Which_ F2 F3 F4. _Whom_ Malone.

[2746] _sour_] Rowe. _foure_ F1 F2. _four_ F3 F4. _your_ S. Walker conj.

[2747] [Retires ...] Dyce. Exit Timon. Ff.

[2748] _His ... nature._] Arranged as in Capell. Prose in Ff. One line
in Pope.

[2749] _unremoveably_] om. Pope.

[2750] _nature_] _his nature_ Pope.

[2751] _dear_] F4. _deere_ F1 F2. _deer_ F3. _dead_ Rowe. _dread_
Hanmer. _near_ Anon. conj.

[2752] SCENE II.] Dyce. SCENE IV. Pope. SCENE III. Capell.

Before....] Edd. The walls.... Rowe. Athens. A Council-Chamber. Capell.

[2753] two ... and....] two other ... with.... Ff.

[2754] _thy_] _they_ F2.

_I have_] _I've_ Dyce (ed. 2).

[2755] _Besides ... approach._] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[2756] _courier_] Rowe. _currier_ Ff.

_one_] _once_ Upton conj.

[2757] _Whom_] Ff. _Who_ Pope. _And_ Hanmer. _When_ Singer (ed. 2).

_in general_] _on several_ Singer (ed. 2).

[2758] _made ... force_] _had ... force_ Hanmer. _took ... truce_
Staunton conj.

[2759] _made_] _bade_ Jackson conj.

[2760] Enter....] Capell. Enter the other Senators. Ff, after _moved_.

[2761] Third. Sen.] 1. S. Capell.

[2762] _enemies'_] Theobald (ed. 2). _enemies_ Ff. _enemy's_ Delius.

[2763] _foes_] _foe's_ Johnson.

[2764] SCENE III.] Dyce. SCENE V. Johnson. SCENE IV. Capell. Warburton
continues the Scene. Pope puts the whole in the margin.

[2765] The woods.... Enter....] The woods. A rude Tomb seen. Enter....
Capell. Enter a Souldier in the Woods, seeking Timon. Ff.

[2766] _Who's_] F3 F4. _Whose_ F1. Whos F2.

[spying the Tomb. Capell.

[2767] See note (XVII).

_who_] _he_ Capell.

[2768] _read_] F3 F4. _reade_ F1 F2. _rear'd_ Theobald (Warburton).
_did_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. Vol. LX. p. 127). _made_ Delius.

_there does_] _here does_ Theobald (Warburton). _here did_ Capell (MS.
correction).

_not live_] _no live_ F2. _not lye_ Capell conj.

[2769] _Dead ... wax_] As in Ff. Three lines in Capell, ending
_tomb ... take ... wax_. Three lines in Singer (ed. 1), ending _grave ...
character ... wax_.

[2770] SCENE IV.] Dyce. SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE V. Pope.

Before....] Theobald.

[2771] Enter....] Enter Alcibiades with his Powers before Athens. Ff.

[2772] [A parley....] Parley sounded. Capell. Sounds a Parly. Ff.

[2773] Enter Senators....] Enter Senators &c.... Capell. The Senators
appeare.... Ff.

[2774] _strong_] _stung_ S. Walker conj.

[2775] _of_] F1. _to_ F2 F3 F4.

[2776] _ingratitude_] _ingratitudes_ Capell.

[2777] _their_] _its_ Hanmer.

[2778] _means_] _'mends_ Theobald.

[2779] _griefs_] Theobald. _greefe_ F1 F2. _grief_ F3 F4.

[2780] _Shame ... excess_] Theobald. (_Shame that they wanted, cunning
in excesse_) F1. _Shame_ (_that they wanted cunning in excesse_) F2
F3 F4. _Shame that they wanted coming in excess_ Johnson conj.

[2781] _March_,] _March on, oh_ Pope.

[2782] _And ... spotted._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[2783] _All_] _We all_ Hanmer.

[2784] _it is ... take_,] _is't not severe to take?_ Collier (Collier
MS.).

[2785] _revenges ... like_] Steevens (1778). _revenge ... like_ Ff.
_revenge ... like to_ Pope.

[2786] _all together_] F3 F4. _altogether_ F1. _al together_ F2.

[2787] _thou'lt_] _thoul't_ F4. _thou't_ F1 F2 F3.

[2788] _Descend_] _Defend_ F1.

[2789] _Timon's_] _Timon_ Hanmer.

[2790] _render'd to your_] Dyce (Chedworth conj.). _remedied to your_
F1. _remedied by your_ F2 F3 F4. _remedied by_ Pope. _remedied to_
Johnson. _remedy'd, to your_ Malone. _remitted to your_ Singer (ed.
2.). See note (XVIII).

[2791] [The Senators....] Malone. Senators come from the Walls, and
deliver their keys to Alcibiades. Capell. om. Ff.

Enter Soldier.] Capell. Enter a Soldier. Theobald. Enter a Messenger.
Ff.

[2792] _his_] _the_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2793] _Interprets_] _Interpreteth_ Pope.

_poor_] _poorer_ S. Walker conj. (withdrawn).

[2794] Alcib. [Reads] Alcibiades reades the Epitaph. Ff.

[2795] _wicked_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2796] _alive_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2797] _pass and_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.]

_gait_] Johnson. _gate_ Ff. _gaite_ Pope.

[2798] _abhorr'dst_] _abhorred'st_ Rowe.

_human_] Rowe. _humane_ Ff.

[2799] _brain's_] Steevens. _braines_ F1 F2 F3. _brains_ F4. _brine's_
Hanmer. _brains'_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2800] _grave ... Dead_] Ff. _grave.--On: faults forgiven.--Dead_
Theobald. _grave our faults--forgiv'n, since dead_ Hanmer. _grave.--One
fault's forgiven.--Dead_ Tyrwhitt conj.

[2801] _use_] _twine_ S. Walker conj. _prune_ Anon. conj.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

DRAMATIS PERSONÃ. In the list given in the Folio PHRYNIA, TIMANDRA, and
others are omitted. 'Timon's creditors' are termed 'usurers.' VENTIDIUS
is called VENTIGIUS, PHILOTUS, PHILO, and HORTENSIUS, HORTENSIS. VARRO
and LUCIUS occur among the names of the servants, and the latter has
been retained by all editors except Mr Dyce in his second edition.
In the play the servants address each other by the names of their
respective masters: hence the confusion. Perhaps all the names assigned
to the servants should be considered as names of their masters.
'Hortensius,' for instance, has not a servile sound. Flaminius and
Servilius may be regarded rather as gentlemen in waiting than menials.

Sidney Walker suggests that CAPHIS should be CAPYS.

The list as given by modern editors contains successive additions and
alterations made by Rowe, Johnson and Capell, which it is unnecessary
to specify further.

With the exception of '_Actus Primus. ScÃ¦na Prima_' at the beginning,
there is in the Folios no indication of a division into Act or Scene
throughout the play.


NOTE II.

I. 1. 1, 2. This conjecture of Farmer's is given from his own MS. in
the copy of Johnson's Shakespeare which belonged to him, now in the
library of Emmanuel College. In a note found in the Variorum edition,
_ad loc._, he makes a different suggestion:

    '_Poet._ Good day.

    _Pain._ Good day, sir: I am glad you're well.'


NOTE III.

I. 2. 1-3. We have left this corrupt passage as it stands in the
Folios. Rowe made no change. Pope altered it to:

    'Most honour'd Timon, it hath pleas'd the gods
    To call my father's age unto long peace.'

In this reading he was followed by Theobald, Hanmer and Warburton.
Johnson read:

    'Most honour'd Timon, it hath pleas'd the Gods
    To remember my father's age,
    And call him to long peace.'

Capell has:

    Most honour'd Timon,
    'T hath pleas'd the gods in kindness to remember
    My father's age, and call him to long peace.'

Steevens (1773) has:

    'Most honour'd Timon, it hath pleas'd the Gods to remember
    My father's age, and call him to long peace.'

In his edition of 1793 he read 'remember' for 'to remember.'


NOTE IV.

I. 2. 53-58. The Folios print Apemantus's speech as prose down to
'Timon'; then as four lines of verse:

    'Heere's that which is too weake to be a sinner,
    Honest water, which nere left man i' th' mire:
    This &c.'

The second has 'mird' for 'mire.' The third and fourth follow the
first. Pope, whose arrangement we follow, prints as prose down to
'mire.' Capell prints the whole as verse thus:

    'Flow this way!
    A most brave fellow! he keeps his tides well. Timon,
    Those healths will make thee, and thy state, look ill,'

following the Folios in the next four lines.

Steevens adopts this arrangement omitting 'most' in the second line.
Sidney Walker would divide the lines thus:

    'Flow this way! a brave fellow!
    He keeps his tides well. Timon, these healths will make
    Thee, and thy state, look ill. Here's that which is
    Too weak to be a sinner, honest water,
    Which ne'er left man i' th' mire: &c.'


NOTE V.

I. 2. 89-91. Mr Staunton suggests that one of the two clauses 'if we
should ne'er have need of 'em' and 'should we ne'er have use for 'em'
was intended to be cancelled.


NOTE VI.

I. 2. 113-118. The first Folio, followed substantially by the rest, has:

    '_Cap._ Haile to thee worthy _Timon_ and to all that of his
    Bounties taste: the fiue best Sences acknowledge thee their
    Patron, and come freely to gratulate thy plentious bosome.

    There tast, touch all, pleas'd from thy Table rise:
    They onely now come but to Feast thine eies.'

Rowe made no material alteration except that he put a comma after
'touch' in the last line but one.

Pope arranged thus:

    'Hail to thee, worthy _Timon_, and to all
    That of his bounties taste:
    The five best senses acknowledge thee their patron, and come freely
    To gratulate thy plenteous bosom.
    There &c.'

Theobald:

    'Hail to thee, worthy _Timon_, and to all
    That of his bounties taste! the five best Senses
    Acknowledge thee their patron; and do come
    Freely to gratulate thy plenteous bosom:
    Th' Ear, Taste, Touch, Smell, pleas'd from thy Table rise,
    These only now come but to feast thine eyes.'

and he adds in a note: 'The incomparable Emendation, with which the
Text is here supply'd, I owe to my ingenious Friend Mr _Warburton_.' It
was adopted by Hanmer and Johnson. Capell altered 'do come' in line 3
to 'are come;' Steevens (1785) restored 'They' for 'These' in the last
line, and Malone changed 'pleas'd' in the last line but one to 'all
pleas'd.'

Rann introduced the change which we have adopted in the text, placing
'th' ear' at the end of the fourth line, and reading 'Taste, touch
_and_ smell' in the fifth. Steevens, in his edition of 1793, followed
this arrangement, reading in the fifth line, 'Taste, touch, smell, all
pleas'd, &c.'


NOTE VII.

I. 2. 171, 172. We have printed this passage as prose, as it is
difficult to say from the arrangement of the lines in the first and
second Folios, whether or not it was intended to be read as two lines
of verse, the first ending 'thee,' as it certainly is in the third and
fourth Folios. Pope printed it as prose. Capell eked out the metre thus:

    'Me near? why, then another time I'll hear thee:
    I pr'ythee, let us be provided now
    To shew them entertainment.'

Steevens suggested 'provided _straight_' in the second line.

In many parts of this play it is difficult to say whether the lines are
intended to be read as irregular verse, or as rhythmical prose, and we
have therefore left them as they stand in the Folios.


NOTE VIII.

II. 2. 89-96. This and many other passages are printed in the Folio as
if they were intended to be irregular verse, where it is evident that
they can only be read as prose. In such cases it is not always worth
while to record how the lines were divided by the caprice or negligence
of the printer. Seymour has endeavoured throughout the play to complete
imperfect lines by the insertion of words, and imperfect hemistichs by
the addition of entire clauses, but he has in this so far exceeded the
license of conjecture that, except in the first scene of the play, we
have not recorded all his proposed alterations.


NOTE IX.

III. 2. 60-64. Pope altered these lines as follows:

    'Why, this is the world's soul;
    Of the same piece, is every flatterer's sport:
    Who can call him his friend
    That dips in the same dish? for in my knowing,
    _Timon_ has been to this lord as a father,
    And kept his credit with his bounteous purse.'

Theobald follows Pope's arrangement, but reads 'spirit' for 'sport' in
the second line, an emendation which he first suggested in a letter
to Warburton, still unpublished, in the British Museum. Warburton's
conjecture 'coat,' which he made no allusion to in his own edition,
is mentioned by Theobald in the same letter. Hanmer gives the whole
passage thus:

    'Why, this is the world's soul;
    Of the same piece is every flatterer's spirit:
    Who can call him his friend that dips with him
    In the same dish? for even in my knowing,
    _Timon_ has been to this Lord as a father,
    And kept his credit with his bounteous purse.'

Johnson follows the Folios except that he gives the first lines thus:

    'Why, this is the world's soul;
    And just of the same piece is every flatterer's spirit:
    Who can call him his friend,
    That &c.'

Steevens, in the edition of 1773, followed Johnson's arrangement, but
adopted in the first lines a transposition proposed by Upton:

    'Why, this is the world's sport;
    And just of the same piece is every flatterer's soul.'

In his edition of 1793 he read as follows:

    'Why this
    Is the world's soul; and just of the same piece
    Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him
    His friend, &c.'

Following, in the rest, Capell's arrangement.

Malone arranged as follows:

    'Why this is the world's soul, and just of the same piece
    Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him his friend,
    That dips in the same dish? for in my knowing
    Timon has been this lord's father, and kept
    His credit with his purse.'

In a note, however, he says, 'I do not believe this speech was intended
by the authour for verse.'


NOTE X.

III. 3. 8. Hanmer made here one of his audacious alterations:

    'How? deny'd him?
    Have Lucius and Ventidius and Lucullus
    Deny'd him all? and does he send to me?
    It shews &c.'

Capell emulated him thus:

    'How! have they deny'd him?
    Has Lucius, and Ventidius, and Lucullus,
    Deny'd him, say you? and does he send to me?
    Three? hum!
    It shews &c.'


NOTE XI.

III. 3. 19. Hanmer altered the passage thus:

    'That I'll requite it last? so it may prove
    An argument of laughter to the rest,
    And amongst Lords I shall be thought a fool.'

Capell follows Hanmer, except that he replaces 'no' in the first line.

Steevens (1793) follows Capell in the first two lines, reading in the
third:

    'And I amongst the Lords be thought a fool.'

Mr. Staunton suggests that the passage once stood:

                      'So I may prove
    An argument of laughter to the rest,
    And amongst lords be thought a fool.'

Mr. Dyce, in his second edition proposes the following arrangement:

    'That I'll requite it last? No: so it may prove
    An argument of laughter to the rest,
    And amongst lords I be thought a fool.'


NOTE XII.

III. 5. 14-18. The first Folio, followed substantially by the rest, has:

    'He is a Man (setting his Fate aside) of comely Vertues,
    Nor did he soyle the fact with Cowardice,
    (And Honour in him, which buyes out his fault)
    But &c.'

Rowe arranged the lines as follows:

    'He is a Man, setting his Fate aside, of comely Virtues,
    And Honour in him, which buys out his Fault;
    Nor did he soil the Fact with Cowardise,
    But &c.'

Pope read:

    'He is a man, setting his fault aside,
    Of virtuous honour, which buys out his fault;
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardise,
    But &c.'

Theobald follows Pope verbatim, and so Hanmer, except that he reads
'setting this fact aside.' Warburton proposed 'setting this fault
aside.' Johnson read:

    'He is a man, setting his fault aside,
    Of comely virtues;
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardise,
    An honour in him which buys out his fault,
    But, &c.'

Steevens, in his edition of 1773, restored 'his fate' from the Folios
in the first line, giving the reading we have adopted in the text.


NOTE XIII.

III. 5. 49-51. The first Folio has here:

    'And the Asse, more Captaine then the Lyon?
    The fellow loaden with Irons, wiser then the Iudge?
    If Wisedome be in suffering, Oh my Lords,
          &c. &c.'

The second Folio:

    'And the Asse, more Captaine then the Lyon? the fellow
    Loaden with Irons, wiser then the Iudge?
    If Wisedome be in suffering. Oh my Lords,
          &c. &c.'

The third and fourth Folios, spelling apart, follow the second.

Rowe placed a comma after 'Judge,' and this punctuation was adopted by
all subsequent editors.

Pope altered the passage thus:

    'The ass, more than the lion; and the fellow
    Loaden with irons, &c.'

He was followed by Theobald, Hanmer and Warburton, and by Johnson in
his text; the last named however proposed a different arrangement of
the preceding line and the substitution of 'felon' for 'fellow' in line
49, thus:

                  'what make we
    Abroad, why then the women are more valiant
    That stay at home;
    If bearing carry it, then is the ass
    More captain than the lion, and the felon
    Loaden with irons &c.'

This suggestion was adopted substantially by Rann. The reading 'felon'
had been independently proposed by Theobald (Nichols's _Illustrations_,
II. 475).

Capell and Steevens (1773) followed Pope. Steevens (1778) read:

    'The ass, more captain than the lion; and the fellow,
    Loaden &c.'

In 1793 he read:

    'And th' ass, more captain than the lion; the felon,
    Loaden &c.'

This was followed in the Variorum Editions of 1803 and 1813.

Malone (1790) read:

    'And the ass, more captain than the lion; the fellow,
    Loaden &c.'

and was followed by Boswell (1821).

Mr Knight (1839) returned to the arrangement and readings of the first
Folio. Singer (ed. 2) adopted this arrangement, but read 'felon' for
'fellow.' In his first edition he followed the arrangement of the
second Folio, reading 'felon.'

Mitford suggests:

    'The ass more than the lion, and the felon
    Loaden &c.'

or:

    'And th' ass more than the lion, the felon
    Loaden &c.'


NOTE XIV.

V. 1. Johnson calls attention to the impropriety of placing the entry
of the Banditti in one act and that of the Poet and Painter in another,
when the latter were mentioned as within view when Apemantus parted
from Timon. 'It might be suspected,' he says, 'that some scenes are
transposed, for all these difficulties would be removed by introducing
the Poet and Painter first, and the thieves in this place. Yet I am
afraid the scenes must keep their present order, for the Painter
alludes to the Thieves, when he says, _he likewise enriched poor
straggling soldiers with great quantity_.'


NOTE XV.

V. 1. 59. After the word 'enough' in the first Folio a space has
slipped up, but there is no trace of any stop. The punctuation, as Mr
Dyce observes, is important to the sense of the preceding line.


NOTE XVI.

V. 1. 131. The word 'canterisynge' for 'cauterizing,' is found very
frequently in an old surgical work, printed in 1541, of which the title
is 'The questyonary of Cyrurgyens.' The heading of one of the chapters
is, 'Here foloweth the fourthe partycle, where as be moued and soyled
other dyffycultees touchyng the maner of _canterisynge_ or searynge.'
The instrument with which the operation is performed is in the same
book called a 'cantere.' The form of the word may have been suggested
by the false analogy of 'canterides,' _i.e._ cantharides, which occurs
in the same chapter.


NOTE XVII.

V. 3. 3, 4. Mr Staunton prints as follows:

    [_Reads._] _TIMON IS DEAD!--who hath outstretch'd his span,--
               Some beast--read this; there does not live a man._

He regards these lines as the only part of the inscription which the
soldier could read, the rest being in some different language. But this
explanation introduces a fresh difficulty. The difficulty would be
lessened by supposing the legible lines to be inscribed not on the tomb
but on the rock beside it, and the epitaph proper to be written not in
a different language but in a different character: a notion which might
be suggested to the author by the Gothic letters commonly found on
ancient monuments.

In the Globe edition we adopted the emendation 'rear'd' because,
with the change of a single letter, it yields something approaching
to a satisfactory sense. But we incline to think that the words were
originally intended as an epitaph to be read by the soldier. The
author may have changed his mind and forgotten to obliterate what
was inconsistent with the sequel, or the text may have been tampered
with by some less accomplished playwright. Anyhow the close of the
play bears marks of haste, or want of skill, and the clumsy device of
the wax cannot have been invented and would scarcely be adopted by
Shakespeare.

In the epitaph given in the next scene two inconsistent couplets are
combined into a quatrain.


NOTE XVIII.

V. 4. 62. Some editors attribute the conjecture 'render'd' to Mason;
but the earliest mention of it which we have remarked is in Lord
Chedworth's volume of _Notes_ (1805).




JULIUS CÃSAR.




DRAMATIS PERSONÃ[2802].


  JULIUS CÃSAR.
  OCTAVIUS CÃSAR,    }
  MARCUS ANTONIUS,   }  triumvirs after the death of Julius CÃ¦sar.
  M. ÃMIL. LEPIDUS,  }
  CICERO,         }
  PUBLIUS,        }  senators.
  POPILIUS LENA,  }
  MARCUS BRUTUS,        }
  CASSIUS,              }
  CASCA,                }
  TREBONIUS,            }  conspirators against Julius CÃ¦sar.
  LIGARIUS,             }
  DECIUS[2803] BRUTUS,  }
  METELLUS CIMBER,      }
  CINNA,                }
  FLAVIUS and MARULLUS, tribunes.
  ARTEMIDORUS of Cnidos, a teacher of Rhetoric[2804].
  A Soothsayer.
  CINNA, a poet. Another Poet.
  LUCILIUS,     }
  TITINIUS,     }
  MESSALA,      }  friends to Brutus and Cassius.
  Young CATO,   }
  VOLUMNIUS,    }
  VARRO,      }
  CLITUS,     }
  CLAUDIUS,   }  servants to Brutus.
  STRATO,     }
  LUCIUS,     }
  DARDANIUS,  }
  PINDARUS, servant to Cassius.

  CALPURNIA[2805], wife to CÃ¦sar.
  PORTIA, wife to Brutus.

              Senators, Citizens, Guards, Attendants, &c.

    SCENE: _Rome; the neighbourhood of Sardis; the neighbourhood of_
                              _Philippi._

                             THE TRAGEDY OF

                             JULIUS CÃSAR.

FOOTNOTES:

[2802] First given imperfectly by Rowe: more fully by Theobald.

[2803] DECIUS] DECIMUS Hanmer.

[2804] See note (1).

[2805] CALPURNIA] Grant White. CALPHURNIA Rowe.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _Rome. A street._[2806]

       _Enter_ FLAVIUS, MARULLUS, _and certain_ Commoners.[2807]

    _Flav._ Hence! home, you idle creatures, get you home:
    Is this a holiday? what! know you not,
    Being mechanical, you ought not walk
    Upon a labouring day without the sign
    Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?                    5

    _First Com._ Why, sir, a carpenter.[2808]

    _Mar._ Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
    What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
    You, sir, what trade are you?

    _Sec. Com._ Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I[2809]     10
    am but, as you would say, a cobbler.[2810]

    _Mar._ But what trade art thou? answer me directly.

    _Sec. Com._ A trade, sir, that, I hope, I may use with a[2811]
    safe conscience; which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.[2812]

    _Mar._ What trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what
        trade?[2813]                                                  15

    _Sec. Com._ Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with[2809]
    me: yet, if you be out, sir, I can mend you.[2814]

    _Mar._ What mean'st thou by that? mend me, thou[2815]
    saucy fellow!

    _Sec. Com._ Why, sir, cobble you.                                 20

    _Flav._ Thou art a cobbler, art thou?

    _Sec. Com._ Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl: I[2816]
    meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters,[2817]
    but with awl. I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when[2818]
    they are in great danger, I re-cover them. As proper men as[2819]  25
    ever trod upon neats-leather have gone upon my handiwork.

    _Flav._ But wherefore art not in thy shop to-day?[2820]
    Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?[2820]

    _Sec. Com._ Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself
    into more work. But indeed, sir, we make holiday, to              30
    see CÃ¦sar and to rejoice in his triumph.

    _Mar._ Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?[2821]
    What tributaries follow him to Rome,
    To grace in captive bonds his chariot-wheels?
    You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!          35
    O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
    Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft[2822]
    Have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,[2822]
    To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,[2823]
    Your infants in your arms, and there have sat                     40
    The live-long day with patient expectation
    To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:[2824]
    And when you saw his chariot but appear,
    Have you not made an universal shout,
    That Tiber trembled underneath her banks[2825]                    45
    To hear the replication of your sounds
    Made in her concave shores?[2825][2826][2827]
    And do you now put on your best attire?[2826]
    And do you now cull out a holiday?[2826][2828]
    And do you now strew flowers in his way[2826]                     50
    That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?[2826][2829]
    Be gone![2826]
    Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
    Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    That needs must light on this ingratitude.                        55

    _Flav._ Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,[2830]
    Assemble all the poor men of your sort;
    Draw them to Tiber banks and weep your tears[2831]
    Into the channel, till the lowest stream
    Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.[2832]                     60

                                            [_Exeunt all the Commoners._

    See, whether their basest metal be not moved;[2833]
    They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.[2834]
    Go you down that way towards the Capitol;[2835]
    This way will I: disrobe the images,
    If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.                       65

    _Mar._ May we do so?[2836]
    You know it is the feast of Lupercal.[2836]

    _Flav._ It is no matter; let no images[2837]
    Be hung with CÃ¦sar's trophies. I'll about,[2838]
    And drive away the vulgar from the streets:                       70
    So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    These growing feathers pluck'd from CÃ¦sar's wing
    Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    Who else would soar above the view of men
    And keep us all in servile fearfulness.      [_Exeunt._   [2839]  75


SCENE II. _A public place._[2840]

     _Flourish. Enter_ CÃSAR; ANTONY, _for the course_; CALPURNIA,
       PORTIA, DECIUS, CICERO, BRUTUS, CASSIUS, _and_ CASCA; _a_
           _great crowd following, among them a_ Soothsayer.

    _CÃ¦s._ Calpurnia![2841]

    _Casca._          Peace, ho! CÃ¦sar speaks.

                                                  [_Music ceases._[2842]

    _CÃ¦s._                                     Calpurnia!

    _Cal._ Here, my lord.

    _CÃ¦s._ Stand you directly in Antonius' way,[2843]
    When he doth run his course. Antonius![2844]

    _Ant._ CÃ¦sar, my lord?[2845]                                       5

    _CÃ¦s._ Forget not, in your speed, Antonius,[2844]
    To touch Calpurnia; for our elders say,[2841]
    The barren, touched in this holy chase,
    Shake off their sterile curse.[2846]

    _Ant._                         I shall remember:
    When CÃ¦sar says 'do this,' it is perform'd.                       10

    _CÃ¦s._ Set on, and leave no ceremony out.      [_Flourish._[2847]

    _Sooth._ CÃ¦sar!

    _CÃ¦s._ Ha! who calls?

    _Casca._ Bid every noise be still: peace yet again![2848][2849]

    _CÃ¦s._ Who is it in the press that calls on me?                   15
    I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
    Cry 'CÃ¦sar.' Speak; CÃ¦sar is turn'd to hear.

    _Sooth._ Beware the ides of March.

    _CÃ¦s._                              What man is that?

    _Bru._ A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.[2850]

    _CÃ¦s._ Set him before me; let me see his face.                    20

    _Cas._ Fellow, come from the throng; look upon CÃ¦sar.[2851]

    _CÃ¦s._ What say'st thou to me now? speak once again.

    _Sooth._ Beware the ides of March.

    _CÃ¦s._ He is a dreamer; let us leave him: pass.

                     [_Sennet. Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius._[2852]

    _Cas._ Will you go see the order of the course?[2853]             25

    _Bru._ Not I.

    _Cas._ I pray you, do.

    _Bru._ I am not gamesome: I do lack some part
    Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
    Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;                         30
    I'll leave you.[2854]

    _Cas._ Brutus, I do observe you now of late:[2855]
    I have not from your eyes that gentleness
    And show of love as I was wont to have:
    You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand                      35
    Over your friend that loves you.[2856]

    _Bru._                           Cassius,
    Be not deceived: if I have veil'd my look,[2857]
    I turn the trouble of my countenance
    Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
    Of late with passions of some difference,                         40
    Conceptions only proper to myself,
    Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviours;[2858]
    But let not therefore my good friends be grieved--
    Among which number, Cassius, be you one--
    Nor construe any further my neglect[2859]                         45
    Than that poor Brutus with himself at war
    Forgets the shows of love to other men.

    _Cas._ Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion;[2860]
    By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.                      50
    Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?[2861]

    _Bru._ No, Cassius; for the eye sees not itself[2862][2863]
    But by reflection, by some other things.[2862][2864]

    _Cas._ 'Tis just:[2865]
    And it is very much lamented, Brutus,                             55
    That you have no such mirrors as will turn[2866]
    Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
    That you might see your shadow. I have heard[2867]
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    Except immortal CÃ¦sar, speaking of Brutus,                        60
    And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.

    _Bru._ Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,[2868]
    That you would have me seek into myself
    For that which is not in me?                                      65

    _Cas._ Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear:[2869]
    And since you know you cannot see yourself
    So well as by reflection, I your glass
    Will modestly discover to yourself
    That of yourself which you yet know not of.[2870]                 70
    And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:[2871]
    Were I a common laugher, or did use[2872]
    To stale with ordinary oaths my love
    To every new protester; if you know
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard,                          75
    And after scandal them; or if you know
    That I profess myself in banqueting[2873]
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.

                                                  [_Flourish and shout._

    _Bru._ What means this shouting? I do fear, the people[2874]
    Choose CÃ¦sar for their king.[2874]

    _Cas._                       Ay, do you fear it?                  80
    Then must I think you would not have it so.

    _Bru._ I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
    But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
    What is it that you would impart to me?
    If it be aught toward the general good,                           85
    Set honour in one eye and death i' the other,
    And I will look on both indifferently,[2875]
    For let the gods so speed me as I love
    The name of honour more than I fear death.

    _Cas._ I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,                   90
    As well as I do know your outward favour.
    Well, honour is the subject of my story.
    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Think of this life, but, for my single self,[2876]
    I had as lief not be as live to be                                95
    In awe of such a thing as I myself.
    I was born free as CÃ¦sar; so were you:
    We both have fed as well, and we can both
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he:
    For once, upon a raw and gusty day,                              100
    The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,[2877]
    CÃ¦sar said to me 'Darest thou, Cassius, now[2878]
    Leap in with me into this angry flood,
    And swim to yonder point?' Upon the word,
    Accoutred as I was, I plunged in[2879]                           105
    And bade him follow: so indeed he did.[2880]
    The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it[2881]
    With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
    And stemming it with hearts of controversy;
    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,[2882]                110
    CÃ¦sar cried 'Help me, Cassius, or I sink!'
    I, as Ãneas our great ancestor[2883]
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder[2884]
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber[2884][2885]
    Did I the tired CÃ¦sar: and this man                              115
    Is now become a god, and Cassius is
    A wretched creature, and must bend his body
    If CÃ¦sar carelessly but nod on him.
    He had a fever when he was in Spain,[2886]
    And when the fit was on him, I did mark                          120
    How he did shake: 'tis true, this god did shake;
    His coward lips did from their colour fly,
    And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    Did lose his lustre: I did hear him groan:[2887]
    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans                  125
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,[2888]
    Alas, it cried, 'Give me some drink, Titinius,'[2889]
    As a sick girl. Ye gods! it doth amaze me
    A man of such a feeble temper should
    So get the start of the majestic world                           130
    And bear the palm alone.      [_Shout. Flourish._[2890]

    _Bru._ Another general shout![2891]
    I do believe that these applauses are
    For some new honours that are heap'd on CÃ¦sar.

    _Cas._ Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world               135
    Like a Colossus, and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs and peep about
    To find ourselves dishonourable graves.
    Men at some time are masters of their fates:[2892]
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,                     140
    But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
    Brutus, and CÃ¦sar: what should be in that CÃ¦sar?[2893]
    Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;[2894]
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;                    145
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,[2895]
    Brutus will start a spirit as soon as CÃ¦sar.[2896]
    Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    Upon what meat doth this our CÃ¦sar feed,
    That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!                 150
    Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    When went there by an age, since the great flood,
    But it was famed with more than with one man?
    When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
    That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?[2897]               155
    Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,[2898]
    When there is in it but one only man.[2898]
    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
    The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome[2899]                160
    As easily as a king.

    _Bru._ That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
    What you would work me to, I have some aim:[2900]
    How I have thought of this and of these times,[2901]
    I shall recount hereafter; for this present,                     165
    I would not, so with love I might entreat you,[2902]
    Be any further moved. What you have said[2903]
    I will consider; what you have to say
    I will with patience hear, and find a time
    Both meet to hear and answer such high things.[2904]             170
    Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    Brutus had rather be a villager
    Than to repute himself a son of Rome
    Under these hard conditions as this time[2905]
    Is like to lay upon us.                                          175

    _Cas._ I am glad that my weak words[2906][2907]
    Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.[2907]

    _Bru._ The games are done, and CÃ¦sar is returning.[2908][2909]

    _Cas._ As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve;[2909]
    And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you                    180
    What hath proceeded worthy note to-day.

                 _Re-enter_ CÃSAR _and his Train_[2910]

    _Bru._ I will do so: but, look you, Cassius,
    The angry spot doth glow on CÃ¦sar's brow,[2911]
    And all the rest look like a chidden train:
    Calpurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero                            185
    Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    As we have seen him in the Capitol,
    Being cross'd in conference by some senators.[2912]

    _Cas._ Casca will tell us what the matter is.

    _CÃ¦s._ Antonius![2913]                                           190

    _Ant._ CÃ¦sar?

    _CÃ¦s._ Let me have men about me that are fat,[2914]
    Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o' nights:[2915]
    Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;[2916]
    He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.                      195

    _Ant._ Fear him not, CÃ¦sar; he's not dangerous;
    He is a noble Roman, and well given.

    _CÃ¦s._ Would he were fatter! but I fear him not:[2917]
    Yet if my name were liable to fear,
    I do not know the man I should avoid                             200
    So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much;
    He is a great observer, and he looks
    Quite through the deeds of men: he loves no plays,
    As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music:
    Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort                      205
    As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
    That could be moved to smile at any thing.
    Such men as he be never at heart's ease[2918]
    Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,[2919]
    And therefore are they very dangerous.                           210
    I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    Than what I fear; for always I am CÃ¦sar.
    Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.

              [_Sennet. Exeunt CÃ¦sar and all his Train but Casca._[2920]

    _Casca._ You pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with
        me?[2921]                                                    215

    _Bru._ Ay, Casca; tell us what hath chanced to-day,
    That CÃ¦sar looks so sad.

    _Casca._ Why, you were with him, were you not?[2922]

    _Bru._ I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.

    _Casca._ Why, there was a crown offered him: and being           220
    offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus:
    and then the people fell a-shouting.[2923]

    _Bru._ What was the second noise for?

    _Casca._ Why, for that too.[2924]

    _Cas._ They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?           225

    _Casca._ Why, for that too.[2924]

    _Bru._ Was the crown offered him thrice?[2925]

    _Casca._ Ay, marry, was't, and he put it by thrice, every
    time gentler than other; and at every putting by mine
    honest neighbours shouted.                                       230

    _Cas._ Who offered him the crown?

    _Casca._ Why, Antony.

    _Bru._ Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.

    _Casca._ I can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it:
    it was mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony[2926]  235
    offer him a crown: yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one
    of these coronets: and, as I told you, he put it by once:
    but for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it.
    Then he offered it to him again; then he put it by again:
    but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.  240
    And then he offered it the third time; he put it the third
    time by: and still as he refused it, the rabblement hooted[2927]
    and clapped their chopped hands and threw up their sweaty[2928]
    night-caps and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because
    CÃ¦sar refused the crown, that it had almost choked               245
    CÃ¦sar; for he swounded and fell down at it: and for mine[2929]
    own part, I durst not laugh, for fear of opening my lips and
    receiving the bad air.

    _Cas._ But, soft, I pray you: what, did CÃ¦sar swound?[2930]

    _Casca._ He fell down in the market-place and foamed at          250
    mouth and was speechless.

    _Bru._'Tis very like: he hath the falling-sickness.[2931]

    _Cas._ No, CÃ¦sar hath it not; but you, and I,
    And honest Casca, we have the falling-sickness.

    _Casca._ I know not what you mean by that, but I am              255
    sure CÃ¦sar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not clap
    him and hiss him according as he pleased and displeased
    them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, I am no[2932]
    true man.

    _Bru._ What said he when he came unto himself?                   260

    _Casca._ Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived
    the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked
    me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut. An[2933]
    I had been a man of any occupation, if I would not have
    taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the[2934]  265
    rogues. And so he fell. When he came to himself again,
    he said, if he had done or said any thing amiss, he desired
    their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four
    wenches, where I stood, cried 'Alas, good soul!' and forgave
    him with all their hearts: but there's no heed to be[2935]       270
    taken of them; if CÃ¦sar had stabbed their mothers, they[2936]
    would have done no less.

    _Bru._ And after that, he came, thus sad, away?[2937]

    _Casca._ Ay.

    _Cas._ Did Cicero say any thing?                                 275

    _Casca._ Ay, he spoke Greek.

    _Cas._ To what effect?

    _Casca._ Nay, an I tell you that, I'll ne'er look you i' the[2938]
    face again: but those that understood him smiled at one
    another and shook their heads; but for mine own part, it         280
    was Greek to me. I could tell you more news too: Marullus[2939]
    and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off CÃ¦sar's images, are
    put to silence. Fare you well. There was more foolery
    yet, if I could remember it.

    _Cas._ Will you sup with me to-night, Casca?                     285

    _Casca._ No, I am promised forth.

    _Cas._ Will you dine with me to-morrow?

    _Casca._ Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your[2940]
    dinner worth the eating.[2941]

    _Cas._ Good; I will expect you.                                  290

    _Casca._ Do so: farewell, both.                             [_Exit._

    _Bru._ What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
    He was quick mettle when he went to school.[2942]

    _Cas._ So is he now in execution
    Of any bold or noble enterprise,                                 295
    However he puts on this tardy form.
    This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    Which gives men stomach to digest his words[2943]
    With better appetite.[2944]

    _Bru._ And so it is. For this time I will leave you:[2945]       300
    To-morrow, if you please to speak with me,[2946]
    I will come home to you, or, if you will,[2947]
    Come home to me and I will wait for you.[2948]

    _Cas._ I will do so: till then, think of the world.

                                                         [_Exit Brutus._

    Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet, I see,[2949]                  305
    Thy honourable metal may be wrought[2950]
    From that it is disposed: therefore it is meet[2951]
    That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
    CÃ¦sar doth bear me hard; but he loves Brutus:                    310
    If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
    He should not humour me. I will this night,[2952]
    In several hands, in at his windows throw,
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion                       315
    That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    CÃ¦sar's ambition shall be glanced at:
    And after this let CÃ¦sar seat him sure;
    For we will shake him, or worse days endure.                [_Exit._


SCENE III. _A street._[2953]

  _Thunder and lightning. Enter, from opposite sides_, CASCA, _with_
                  _his sword drawn, and_ CICERO.[2954]

    _Cic._ Good even, Casca: brought you CÃ¦sar home?
    Why are you breathless? and why stare you so?

    _Casca._ Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
    Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
    I have seen tempests, when the scolding winds                      5
    Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
    The ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam,
    To be exalted with the threatening clouds;
    But never till to-night, never till now,
    Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.[2955]                   10
    Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    Or else the world too saucy with the gods
    Incenses them to send destruction.

    _Cic._ Why, saw you any thing more wonderful?

    _Casca._ A common slave--you know him well by sight--[2956]       15
    Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
    Like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand
    Not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd.
    Besides--I ha' not since put up my sword--[2957]
    Against the Capitol I met a lion,                                 20
    Who glared upon me and went surly by[2958]
    Without annoying me: and there were drawn
    Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women[2959]
    Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.                     25
    And yesterday the bird of night did sit
    Even at noon-day upon the market-place,
    Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies[2960]
    Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
    'These are their reasons: they are natural:'[2961]                30
    For, I believe, they are portentous things
    Unto the climate that they point upon.

    _Cic._ Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time:[2962]
    But men may construe things after their fashion,
    Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.                  35
    Comes CÃ¦sar to the Capitol to-morrow?[2963]

    _Casca._ He doth; for he did bid Antonius[2964]
    Send word to you he would be there to-morrow.

    _Cic._ Good night then, Casca: this disturbed sky[2965]
    Is not to walk in.[2965]

    _Casca._ Farewell, Cicero.                       [_Exit Cicero._  40

                         _Enter_ CASSIUS.[2966]

    _Cas._ Who's there?

    _Casca._            A Roman.

    _Cas._                       Casca, by your voice.

    _Casca._ Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this![2967]

    _Cas._ A very pleasing night to honest men.

    _Casca._ Who ever knew the heavens menace so?[2968]

    _Cas._ Those that have known the earth so full of faults.         45
    For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
    Submitting me unto the perilous night,
    And thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
    Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone;
    And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open                  50
    The breast of heaven, I did present myself
    Even in the aim and very flash of it.

    _Casca._ But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    It is the part of men to fear and tremble
    When the most mighty gods by tokens send                          55
    Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.

    _Cas._ You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life[2969]
    That should be in a Roman you do want,[2969][2970]
    Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze[2969]
    And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder,[2969][2971]          60
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens:
    But if you would consider the true cause
    Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,[2972]
    Why old men fool and children calculate,[2973]                    65
    Why all these things change, from their ordinance,
    Their natures and preformed faculties,
    To monstrous quality, why, you shall find
    That heaven hath infused them with these spirits[2974]
    To make them instruments of fear and warning                      70
    Unto some monstrous state.[2975]
    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man[2975][2976]
    Most like this dreadful night,[2975]
    That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars[2977]
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,[2978]                            75
    A man no mightier than thyself or me
    In personal action, yet prodigious grown
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.[2979]

    _Casca._ 'Tis CÃ¦sar that you mean; is it not, Cassius?[2980]

    _Cas._ Let it be who it is: for Romans now                        80
    Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors;[2981]
    But, woe the while! our fathers' minds are dead
    And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
    Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.

    _Casca._ Indeed they say the senators to-morrow[2982]             85
    Mean to establish CÃ¦sar as a king;
    And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,
    In every place save here in Italy.

    _Cas._ I know where I will wear this dagger then:[2983]
    Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.                        90
    Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat:
    Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;                       95
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
    If I know this, know all the world besides,
    That part of tyranny that I do bear
    I can shake off at pleasure.                       [_Thunder still._

    _Casca._                     So can I:[2984]                     100
    So every bondman in his own hand bears
    The power to cancel his captivity.

    _Cas._ And why should CÃ¦sar be a tyrant then?
    Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf
    But that he sees the Romans are but sheep:                       105
    He were no lion were not Romans hinds.
    Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    Begin it with weak straws: what trash is Rome,
    What rubbish and what offal, when it serves
    For the base matter to illuminate                                110
    So vile a thing as CÃ¦sar! But, O grief,
    Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,
    And dangers are to me indifferent.                               115

    _Casca._ You speak to Casca, and to such a man
    That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand:[2985]
    Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    And I will set this foot of mine as far
    As who goes farthest.

    _Cas._ There's a bargain made.                                   120
    Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
    Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans[2986]
    To undergo with me an enterprise
    Of honourable-dangerous consequence;[2987]
    And I do know, by this they stay for me[2988]                    125
    In Pompey's porch: for now, this fearful night,
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element[2989]
    In favour's like the work we have in hand,[2990]
    Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.[2991]                     130

                          _Enter_ CINNA.[2992]

    _Casca._ Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.

    _Cas._ 'Tis Cinna; I do know him by his gait;[2993]
    He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?

    _Cin._ To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?

    _Cas._ No, it is Casca; one incorporate                          135
    To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?[2994]

    _Cin._ I am glad on't. What a fearful night is this![2995]
    There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.

    _Cas._ Am I not stay'd for? tell me.

    _Cin._                               Yes, you are.[2996][2997]
    O Cassius, if you could[2997][2998]                              140
    But win the noble Brutus to our party--[2997][2998]

    _Cas._ Be you content: good Cinna, take this paper,
    And look you lay it in the prÃ¦tor's chair,
    Where Brutus may but find it, and throw this[2999]
    In at his window; set this up with wax                           145
    Upon old Brutus' statue: all this done,[3000]
    Repair to Pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
    Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?[3001]

    _Cin._ All but Metellus Cimber; and he's gone
    To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,                     150
    And so bestow these papers as you bade me.[3002]

    _Cas._ That done, repair to Pompey's theatre.         [_Exit Cinna._
    Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
    See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
    Is ours already, and the man entire[3003]                        155
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.

    _Casca._ O, he sits high in all the people's hearts;
    And that which would appear offence in us
    His countenance, like richest alchemy,
    Will change to virtue and to worthiness.                         160

    _Cas._ Him and his worth and our great need of him
    You have right well conceited. Let us go,
    For it is after midnight, and ere day
    We will awake him and be sure of him.                     [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[2806] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. ScÃ¦na Prima. Ff.

Rome. A street.] Capell. Rome. Rowe. A Street in Rome. Theobald.

[2807] Enter ...] Enter a Rabble of Citizens; Flavius, and Murellus,
driving them. Capell. Enter Flavius, Marullus, a Carpenter, a Cobler,
and certain other Commoners. Jennens.

Marullus,] Theobald, from Plutarch. Murellus, Ff.

certain Commoners.] certaine Commoners over the Stage. Ff. certain
Plebeians. Hanmer.

[2808] First Com.] 1. C. Capell. Car. Ff. 1 Pleb. Hanmer.

[2809] Sec. Com.] 2. C. Capell. Cobl. Ff. 2 Pleb. Hanmer.

[2810] _you_] _who_ Anon. conj.

[2811] Sec. Com.] Edd. Cob. Ff. 2 Pleb. Hanmer. 2. C. Capell. First
Cit. Dyce (ed. 1).

[2812] _soles_] _soals_ F4. _soules_ F1 F2. _souls_ F3.

[2813] Mar.] Mur. Capell. Fla. Ff.

[2814] _if you be_] _if you should be_ Keightley.

[2815] Mar.] Mur. Ff. Flav. Theobald.

_thou_] om. Steevens conj., reading as verse.

[2816] _with_] om. Rowe.

[2817] _no tradesman's_] _no man's_ Hanmer. _no tradesmen's_ Warburton.
_no trade,--man's_ Steevens, 1778 (Farmer conj.). _trades, man's_
Staunton conj.

_women's_] _womens_ F1. _womans_ F2 F3 F4.

[2818] _with awl. I_] Steevens, 1778 (Farmer conj.). _withal I_ F1.
_withall I_ F2 F3. _withal, I_ F4. _with all. I_ Capell.

[2819] _re-cover_] Pope. _recover_ Ff.

[2820] _But ... streets?_] As in Ff. Prose in Theobald (ed. 2).

[2821] _Wherefore ... home?_] One line in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.]

_conquest_] _conquests_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2822] _Pompey? Many ... oft Have_] Rowe (ed. 2). _Pompey many ...
oft? Have_ Ff.

[2823] _windows_,] Rowe. _windowes?_ Ff.

[2824] _Rome_:] Ff. _Rome?_ Rowe.

[2825] _her_] _his_ Rowe.

[2826] _Made ... Be gone!_] Arranged as in Ff. Five lines in Hanmer,
ending _now ... now ... now ... Rome ... gone._

[2827] _shores_] _shotes_ F2.

[2828] _a_] _an_ F4.

[2829] _comes_] _comes to Rome_ Hanmer.

[2830] _this_] _that_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[2831] _Tiber banks_] _Tyber bank_ Rowe. _Tyber's bank_ Theobald (ed.
2).

[2832] [Exeunt ...] Ff. Exeunt Commoners. Rowe. Exeunt Plebeians.
Hanmer. Exeunt Citizens. Capell.

[2833] _whether_] _where_ Ff. _whe're_ Theobald. _whe'r_ Hanmer. _whÃªr_
Dyce.

_metal_] Johnson. _mettle_ Ff.

[2834] _vanish_] _vanish'd_ Pope.

[2835] _ceremonies_] _ceremony_ Grant White.

[2836] _May ... Lupercal_] As in Ff. Capell ends the first line at
_feast_.

[2837] _It is_] _'Tis_ Capell.

_let no_] _let on_ F2. _let not_ Long MS.

[2838] _with_] F1. _with the_ F2 F3 F4.

[2839] [Exeunt.] Ff. Exeunt severally. Theobald.

[2840] SCENE II.] Pope. om. Ff.

A public place.] Capell. Flourish. Enter ...] Capell, substantially.
Enter CÃ¦sar, Antony for the Course, Carphurnia, ... Cassius, Caska, a
Soothsayer: after them Murellus and Flavius. Ff.

[2841] _Calpurnia_] Grant White (Craik conj.). _Calphurnia_ Ff.

[2842] [Music ceases.] Capell. om. Ff.

[2843] _Antonius'_] Pope. _Antonio's_ Ff.

[2844] _Antonius_] Pope. _Antonio_ Ff.

[2845] _CÃ¦sar_,] om. Anon. conj.

[2846] _curse_] _course_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2847] [Flourish.] Musick; and the Procession moves. Capell om. Ff.

[2848] _Bid ... again!_] continue to CÃ¦sar, or thus: Casc. _Bid ...
peace yet!_ CÃ¦s. _Again! Who is it ..._ Staunton conj.

[2849] [Musick ceases. Capell.

[2850] _soothsayer bids_] _soothsayer, bids_ Craik.

_you_] om. Capell.

[2851] Cas.] Casca. Johnson.

[2852] [Sennet. F1 F2 F3. Senate. F4. om. Rowe. Musick. Capell.

Exeunt ...] Exeunt. Manent Brut. & Cass. Ff (Manet F1).

[2853] SCENE III. Pope.

[2854] _I'll leave you_] om. Seymour. conj.

[2855] _you now_] om. Steevens conj.

[2856] _friend ... loves_] F1. _friends ... loves_ F2 F3.
_friends ... love_ F4.

[2857] _veil'd_] _vail'd_ Seymour conj.

[2858] _behaviours_] _behaviour_ Rowe.

[2859] _further_] Ff. _farther_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2860] _mistook_] _mista'en_ Seymour conj.

[2861] _face_] _eye_ Upton conj.

[2862] _No ... things_] As in Rowe. Three lines, ending _Cassius ...
reflection, ... things_, in Ff.

[2863] _itself_] _it selfe_: F1. _himselfe_ F2. _himself_ F3 F4.

[2864] _by some_] _from some_ Pope. _of some_ Staunton conj.

_things_] _thing_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2865] _'Tis just_:] om. Seymour conj.

[2866] _mirrors_] _mirror_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2867] _That ... heard_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[2868] _Into ... Cassius_] One line in Rowe. Two, the first ending
_you_, in Ff.

[2869] _Therefore_] _Nay, it is, Therefore_ Seymour conj.

[2870] _you yet_] F1 F2. _yet you_ F3 F4.

[2871] _on_] Ff. _of_ Rowe.

[2872] _Were_] _Where_ F2.

_laugher_] Rowe. _laughter_ Ff.

[2873] _myself_] _my selfe_ F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2874] _What ... king_] As in Rowe. Three lines, ending _showting?...
CÃ¦sar ... king,_ in Ff.

[2875] _both_] _death_ Theobald (Warburton).

[2876] _for_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[2877] _chafing_] F1 F4. _chasing_ F2 F3.

_her_] Ff. _his_ Rowe.

[2878] _said_] _saide_ F1. _saies_ F2 F3. _says_ F4.

[2879] _Accoutred_] F1. _Accounted_ F2 F3 F4.

[2880] _bade_] _bid_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2881] _we_] _he_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2882] See note (III).

[2883] _I_] _Then_ Seymour conj.

[2884] _shoulder ... bear_] _shoulders bear The old Anchises_ Seymour
conj.

[2885] _the waves of Tiber_] _Tyber's waves_ Seymour conj.

[2886] _fever_] _Feaher_ F2.

[2887] _his_] _its_ Pope.

[2888] _write_] _writ_ F3 F4.

[2889] _Alas_] _'Alas'_ Staunton.

[2890] [Shout. Flourish.] Ff. Shout again. Capell.

[2891] _general_] om. Seymour conj.

[2892] _some time_] F3 F4. _sometime_ F1 F2. _some times_ Rowe.
_sometimes_ Warburton.

[2893] _that_] om. Seymour conj.

[2894] _yours is_] _yours'_ S. Walker conj.

[2895] _'em_] _'em man_ F3 F4. _them_ Capell.

[2896] _spirit_] _sprite_ Seymour conj.

[Shout. Jennens.

[2897] _walls_] Rowe (ed. 2). _walkes_ F1 F2 F3. _walks_ F4.

[2898] _Now ... man._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[2899] _eternal_] _infernal_ Grey conj.

[2900] See note (III).

_aim_] _aim of_ Keightley.

[2901] _thought_] _though_ F2.

[2902] _not, so ... you_] _not_ (_so ... you_) Theobald. _not so_
(_with ... you_) Ff.

[2903] _further_] _farther_ Collier.

[2904] See note (III).

[2905] _these_] _such_ Rowe. _those_ Craik conj.

_as_] _which_ Singer conj.

[2906] _that ... words_] _my words_ Ritson conj.

[2907] _I ... Brutus._] S. Walker proposes to end the lines _glad ...
show ... Brutus._

[2908] SCENE IV. Pope.

[2909] _The ... sleeve_;] Two lines in Rowe. Four in Ff.

[2910] Re-enter ...] Capell (after line 177). Transferred by Collier to
follow line 178, by Dyce to follow line 181. Enter ... Ff (after line
177).

[2911] _glow_] F1. _hlow_ F2. _blow_ F3 F4.

[2912] _by_] _with_ Rowe.

_senators_] _senator_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2913] _Antonius_] Pope. _Antonio_ Ff.

[2914] [To Ant. apart. Johnson.

[2915] _o'nights_] Capell. _a-nights_ F1 F2. _a nights_ F3 F4.

[2916] _Yond_] _Yon_ Capell.

[2917] _him_] _m_ F4.

[2918] _be_] _are_ Seymour conj.

[2919] _Whiles_] _Whilst_ Rowe.

[2920] [Sennet. Exeunt ...] Sennit. Exeunt CÃ¦sar and his Traine. Ff.
Exeunt CÃ¦sar, and Train: Casca stays. Capell.

[2921] SCENE V. Pope.

[2922] _Why ... not?_] _Were you not with him?_ Seymour conj.

[2923] _a-shouting_] Dyce. _a shouting_ Ff. _a' shouting_ Capell.

[2924] _Why_] om. Seymour conj.

[2925] _him_] om. Seymour conj.

[2926] _was_] F1. _were_ F2 F3 F4.

[2927] _hooted_] Johnson. _howted_ F1 F2 F3. _houted_ F4. _shouted_
Hanmer.

[2928] _chopped_] _chopt_ Ff. _chapped_ Knight.

[2929] _swounded_] _swoonded_ Ff. _swooned_ Rowe.

[2930] _swound_] Ff. _swoon_ Rowe.

[2931] _like: he_] _like; he_ Theobald. _like he_ Ff. _like, he_ Rowe.

[2932] _use_] _used_ Theobald.

[2933] _An_] _An'_ Theobald. _And_ Ff. _If_ Pope.

[2934] _a word_] _his word_ Hanmer.

[2935] _no_] om. F2.

[2936] _stabbed_] _stabb'd_ F2.

[2937] _away?_ Theobald. _away._ Ff.

[2938] _an_] _an'_ Theobald, _and_ Ff. _if_ Pope.

[2939] _Marullus_] Theobald. _Murrellus_ F1. _Murellus_ F2 F3 F4.

[2940] _your mind_] _my mind_ S. Walker conj.

[2941] _worth_] _be worth_ Rowe.

[2942] _quick mettle_] _quick-mettl'd_ Capell conj. _quick metal_
Collier conj.

[2943] _digest_] F3 F4. _disgest_ F1 F2.

[2944] _appetite_] F1. _appetites_ F2 F3 F4.

[2945] _And ... you_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_For this time_] om. Seymour conj.

_you_] _you, Cassius_ Capell, reading _For ... Cassius_ as one line.

[2946] _you_] _yon_ F2.

_with_] _with with_ F2.

[2947] _come_] _go_ Seymour conj.

[2948] _to_] _with_ Seymour conj.

[2949] _art noble; yet_] _art: noble yet_ F2.

[2950] _metal_] F3 F4. _mettle_ F1 _mettall_ F2.

[2951] _that_] _what_ Pope.

_disposed_] _disposed to_ Keightley (Seymour conj.).

_therefore_] _so_ Seymour conj.

_it is_] F1. _tis_ F2. _'tis_ F3 F4.

[2952] _He should not humour_] _CÃ¦sar should not love_ Hanmer.

[2953] SCENE III.] Capell. SCENE VI. Pope. ACT II. SCENE I. Warburton
conj. (withdrawn).

A street.] Capell.

[2954] Enter ...] Capell, substantially. Enter Caska, and Cicero. Ff.
Enter Caska, with his Sword drawn, and Cicero. Rowe. Enter Casca, his
sword drawn; and Cicero, meeting him. Theobald.

[2955] _tempest dropping fire_] Rowe. _tempest-dropping-fire_ Ff.

[2956] _you know_] _you'd know_ Dyce conj. _you knew_ Craik conj.

[2957] _ha'_] _have_ Capell.

[2958] _glared_] _glar'd_ Rowe (ed. 2). _glaz'd_ Ff. _gaz'd_ Malone
(Grey conj.).

_surly_] F1 F4. _surely_ F2 F3.

[2959] _Upon_] _Up on_ Mason conj.

[2960] _Hooting_] Johnson. _Howting_ F1 F2 F3. _Houting_ F4.

[2961] _reasons_] _seasons_ Collier MS.

[2962] _strange-disposed_] Theobald. _strange disposed_ Ff.

[2963] _to_] F1 F2. _up_ F3 F4.

[2964] _Antonius_] Pope. _Antonio_ Ff.

[2965] _Good ... in._] As in Rowe. The first line ends _Caska_: in Ff.

[2966] SCENE VII. Pope.

[2967] _Your ... this!_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_what night_] _what a night_ Craik.

_this!_] Dyce. _this?_ Ff.

[2968] _heavens_] _heaven's_ Warburton.

[2969] _You ... wonder_,] As in Rowe. Five lines, ending _Caska: ...
Roman, ... not ... feare, ... wonder,_ in Ff.

[2970] _That_] _Which_ Capell.

[2971] _cast_] _case_ Grant White (Jervis conj.).

[2972] _Why ... kind_,] Johnson would place this after _ordinance_,
line 66: Mitford, after _faculties_, line 67.

[2973] _old men fool and_] Grant White (Mitford conj.). _Old men,
Fooles, and_ F1 F2. _Old men, Fools, and_ F3 F4. _old men fools, and_
Steevens, 1778 (Blackstone conj.).

[2974] _heaven_] _nature_ Capell.

_hath_] _has_ Theobald.

[2975] _Unto ... night_,] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_Casca_, in Hanmer.

[2976] _to_] om. Capell, following Hanmer's arrangement.

[2977] _roars_] _roares_ F1. _teares_ F2. _tears_ F3 F4.

[2978] _lion in_] _lion, in_ Craik.

[2979] _these strange_] _theser stange_ F2.

[2980] _'Tis ... Cassius?_] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

[2981] _thews_] _sinews_ F3 F4.

[2982] _say_] See note (III).

[2983] _dagger then_] Ff. _dagger, then_ Craik.

[2984] [Thunder still.] Ff. om. Rowe.

[2985] _Hold, my_] Ff. _Hold my_ Theobald.

[2986] _noblest-minded_] Rowe. _Noblest minded_ Ff.

[2987] _honourable-dangerous_] Hyphened first by Capell.

[2988] _know, by this they_] Rowe. _know by this, they_ Ff.

[2989] _element_] _elements_ Warburton.

[2990] _In favour's like_] _In favour's, like_ Johnson. _Is Fauors,
like_ F1 F2. _Is Favours, like_ F3 F4. _Is feav'rous, like_ Rowe.
_Is favour'd like_ Capell. _It favours, like_ Steevens (1773). _It
favours like_ Steevens (1778).

[2991] _bloody, fiery_] _bloody-fiery_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

Enter Cinna.] Transferred by Dyce to follow _friend_, line 133.

[2992] SCENE VIII. Jennens.

[2993] _gait_] Johnson. _gate_ Ff.

[2994] _attempts_] _attempt_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[2995] _I ... this!_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_night is this!_] Rann. _night is this?_ F1. _night?_ F2 F3 F4.

[2996] _for?_] _for, Cinna?_ Capell, ending the line _Yes._

[2997] _Yes ... party--_] Arranged as in Singer (ed. 2). Three lines,
ending _Cassius, ... Brutus ... party--_, in Ff. The lines end _are ...
Brutus ... party--_ in Rowe. Two lines, the first ending _could_, in
Johnson. Three, ending _Yes, ... win ... party--_, in Capell.

[2998] _if you could But win_] _could you win_ Pope, following Rowe's
arrangement.

[2999] _but_] _best_ Craik conj.

[3000] _Brutus'_] Pope. _Brutus_ Ff.

[3001] _Decius_] _Decimus_ Hanmer (and throughout).

[3002] _bade_] Theobald (ed. 2). _bad_ Ff.

[3003] _Is_] _Are_ Hanmer.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _Rome. Brutus's orchard._[3004]

                         _Enter_ BRUTUS.[3005]

    _Bru._ What, Lucius, ho!
    I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
    Give guess how near to day. Lucius, I say!
    I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
    When, Lucius, when? awake, I say! what, Lucius![3006]              5

                            _Enter_ LUCIUS.

    _Luc._ Call'd you, my lord?

    _Bru._ Get me a taper in my study, Lucius:
    When it is lighted, come and call me here.

    _Luc._ I will, my lord.                                     [_Exit._

    _Bru._ It must be by his death: and, for my part,                 10
    I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
    But for the general. He would be crown'd:
    How that might change his nature, there's the question:
    It is the bright day that brings forth the adder;
    And that craves wary walking. Crown him?--that;--[3007]           15
    And then, I grant, we put a sting in him,
    That at his will he may do danger with.
    The abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
    Remorse from power: and, to speak truth of CÃ¦sar,
    I have not known when his affections sway'd                       20
    More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof,
    That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
    Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;[3008]
    But when he once attains the upmost round,[3009]
    He then unto the ladder turns his back,                           25
    Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
    By which he did ascend: so CÃ¦sar may;
    Then, lest he may, prevent. And, since the quarrel[3010]
    Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
    Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,                      30
    Would run to these and these extremities:
    And therefore think him as a serpent's egg
    Which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
    And kill him in the shell.

                        _Re-enter_ LUCIUS.[3011]

    _Luc._ The taper burneth in your closet, sir.                     35
    Searching the window for a flint I found
    This paper thus seal'd up, and I am sure
    It did not lie there when I went to bed.

                                         [_Gives him the letter._[3012]

    _Bru._ Get you to bed again; it is not day.
    Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March?[3013]                   40

    _Luc._ I know not, sir.

    _Bru._ Look in the calendar and bring me word.

    _Luc._ I will, sir.                                         [_Exit._

    _Bru._ The exhalations whizzing in the air
    Give so much light that I may read by them.                       45

                                          [_Opens the letter and reads._

    'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself.
    Shall Rome, &c. Speak, strike, redress.[3014]
    Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake.'
    Such instigations have been often dropp'd
    Where I have took them up.[3015]                                  50
    'Shall Rome, &c.' Thus must I piece it out:[3015]
    Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome?[3016]
    My ancestors did from the streets of Rome[3017]
    The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
    'Speak, strike, redress.' Am I entreated[3018]                    55
    To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,[3019]
    If the redress will follow, thou receivest[3020]
    Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!

                           _Re-enter_ LUCIUS.

    _Luc._ Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.[3021]

                                                     [_Knocking within._

    _Bru._ 'Tis good. Go to the gate; somebody knocks.[3022]          60

                                                         [_Exit Lucius._

    Since Cassius first did whet me against CÃ¦sar
    I have not slept.
    Between the acting of a dreadful thing
    And the first motion all the interim is
    Like a phantasma or a hideous dream:                              65
    The Genius and the mortal instruments[3023]
    Are then in council, and the state of man[3024]
    Like to a little kingdom suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection.

                        _Re-enter_ LUCIUS.[3025]

    _Luc._ Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,                70
    Who doth desire to see you.

    _Bru._                      Is he alone?

    _Luc._ No, sir, there are moe with him.[3026]

    _Bru._                                Do you know them?

    _Luc._ No, sir; their hats are pluck'd about their ears,[3027]
    And half their faces buried in their cloaks,[3028]
    That by no means I may discover them                              75
    By any mark of favour.[3029]

    _Bru._                 Let 'em enter.                [_Exit Lucius._
    They are the faction. O conspiracy,
    Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
    When evils are most free? O, then, by day
    Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough                         80
    To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy;[3030]
    Hide it in smiles and affability:[3031]
    For if thou path, thy native semblance on,[3032]
    Not Erebus itself were dim enough
    To hide thee from prevention.[3033]                               85

   _Enter the conspirators_, CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS, CINNA, METELLUS
                     CIMBER, _and_ TREBONIUS.[3034]

    _Cas._ I think we are too bold upon your rest:
    Good morrow, Brutus; do we trouble you?

    _Bru._ I have been up this hour, awake all night.
    Know I these men that come along with you?[3035]

    _Cas._ Yes, every man of them; and no man here                    90
    But honours you; and every one doth wish
    You had but that opinion of yourself
    Which every noble Roman bears of you.
    This is Trebonius.

    _Bru._             He is welcome hither.

    _Cas._ This, Decius Brutus.

    _Bru._                       He is welcome too.                   95

    _Cas._ This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.[3036]

    _Bru._ They are all welcome.[3037]
    What watchful cares do interpose themselves[3038]
    Betwixt your eyes and night?

    _Cas._ Shall I entreat a word?      [_They whisper._[3039]       100

    _Dec._ Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?

    _Casca._ No.

    _Cin._ O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon grey lines
    That fret the clouds are messengers of day.

    _Casca._ You shall confess that you are both deceived.           105
    Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises;
    Which is a great way growing on the south,
    Weighing the youthful season of the year.
    Some two months hence up higher toward the north
    He first presents his fire, and the high east                    110
    Stands as the Capitol, directly here.

    _Bru._ Give me your hands all over, one by one.

    _Cas._ And let us swear our resolution.

    _Bru._ No, not an oath: if not the face of men,[3040]
    The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse,--[3041]           115
    If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    And every man hence to his idle bed;
    So let high-sighted tyranny range on[3042]
    Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
    As I am sure they do, bear fire enough                           120
    To kindle cowards and to steel with valour
    The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,[3043]
    What need we any spur but our own cause
    To prick us to redress? what other bond
    Than secret Romans that have spoke the word,[3044]               125
    And will not palter? and what other oath[3045]
    Than honesty to honesty engaged
    That this shall be or we will fall for it?[3046]
    Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
    Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls                     130
    That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear[3047]
    Such creatures as men doubt: but do not stain[3048]
    The even virtue of our enterprise,
    Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
    To think that or our cause or our performance                    135
    Did need an oath; when every drop of blood[3049]
    That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
    Is guilty of a several bastardy
    If he do break the smallest particle[3050]
    Of any promise that hath pass'd from him.                        140

    _Cas._ But what of Cicero? shall we sound him?
    I think he will stand very strong with us.

    _Casca._ Let us not leave him out.

    _Cin._                             No, by no means.

    _Met._ O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    Will purchase us a good opinion                                  145
    And buy men's voices to commend our deeds:
    It shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    But all be buried in his gravity.

    _Bru._ O, name him not; let us not break with him,               150
    For he will never follow any thing
    That other men begin.

    _Cas._                Then leave him out.

    _Casca._ Indeed he is not fit.[3051]

    _Dec._ Shall no man else be touch'd but only CÃ¦sar?[3051]

    _Cas._ Decius, well urged: I think it is not meet                155
    Mark Antony, so well beloved of CÃ¦sar,
    Should outlive CÃ¦sar: we shall find of him
    A shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    As to annoy us all: which to prevent,                            160
    Let Antony and CÃ¦sar fall together.

    _Bru._ Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
    To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
    Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
    For Antony is but a limb of CÃ¦sar:                               165
    Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.[3052]
    We all stand up against the spirit of CÃ¦sar,
    And in the spirit of men there is no blood:[3053]
    O, that we then could come by CÃ¦sar's spirit,[3054]
    And not dismember CÃ¦sar! But, alas,                              170
    CÃ¦sar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
    Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
    Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
    Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds:
    And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,[3055]                  175
    Stir up their servants to an act of rage
    And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make[3056]
    Our purpose necessary and not envious:
    Which so appearing to the common eyes,
    We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.[3057]                 180
    And for Mark Antony, think not of him;
    For he can do no more than CÃ¦sar's arm
    When CÃ¦sar's head is off.[3058]

    _Cas._                    Yet I fear him,
    For in the ingrafted love he bears to CÃ¦sar--[3059]

    _Bru._ Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:                  185
    If he love CÃ¦sar, all that he can do
    Is to himself, take thought and die for CÃ¦sar:[3060]
    And that were much he should, for he is given
    To sports, to wildness and much company.[3061]

    _Treb._ There is no fear in him; let him not die;                190
    For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.[3062]

                                                      [_Clock strikes._

    _Bru._ Peace! count the clock.

    _Cas._                         The clock hath stricken three.[3063]

    _Treb._ 'Tis time to part.

    _Cas._                     But it is doubtful yet
    Whether CÃ¦sar will come forth to-day or no;[3064]
    For he is superstitious grown of late,                           195
    Quite from the main opinion he held once[3065]
    Of fantasy, of dreams and ceremonies:[3066]
    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    The unaccustom'd terror of this night
    And the persuasion of his augurers,                              200
    May hold him from the Capitol to-day.

    _Dec._ Never fear that: if he be so resolved,
    I can o'ersway him; for he loves to hear
    That unicorns may be betray'd with trees[3067]
    And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,[3067]              205
    Lions with toils and men with flatterers:[3068]
    But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
    He says he does, being then most flattered.
    Let me work;[3069]
    For I can give his humour the true bent,                         210
    And I will bring him to the Capitol.

    _Cas._ Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.

    _Bru._ By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost?[3070]

    _Cin._ Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.

    _Met._ Caius Ligarius doth bear CÃ¦sar hard,[3071]                215
    Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey:
    I wonder none of you have thought of him.

    _Bru._ Now, good Metellus, go along by him:[3072]
    He loves me well, and I have given him reasons;[3073]
    Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.                       220

    _Cas._ The morning comes upon's: we'll leave you, Brutus:[3074]
    And, friends, disperse yourselves: but all remember
    What you have said and show yourselves true Romans.

    _Bru._ Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
    Let not our looks put on our purposes;                           225
    But bear it as our Roman actors do,
    With untired spirits and formal constancy:
    And so, good morrow to you every one.[3075]

                                               [_Exeunt all but Brutus._

    Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep! It is no matter;
    Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber:[3076]                      230
    Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
    Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
    Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.

                         _Enter_ PORTIA.[3077]

    _Por._                            Brutus, my lord!

    _Bru._ Portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now?
    It is not for your health thus to commit                         235
    Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.[3078]

    _Por._ Nor for yours neither. You've ungently, Brutus,[3079]
    Stole from my bed: and yesternight at supper[3080]
    You suddenly arose and walk'd about,
    Musing and sighing, with your arms across;                       240
    And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
    You stared upon me with ungentle looks:
    I urged you further; then you scratch'd your head[3081]
    And too impatiently stamp'd with your foot:
    Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,                            245
    But with an angry wafture of your hand[3082]
    Gave sign for me to leave you: so I did,
    Fearing to strengthen that impatience
    Which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal
    Hoping it was but an effect of humour,                           250
    Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
    It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
    And, could it work so much upon your shape
    As it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
    I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,[3083]               255
    Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.

    _Bru._ I am not well in health, and that is all.

    _Por._ Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
    He would embrace the means to come by it.

    _Bru._ Why, so I do: good Portia, go to bed.                     260

    _Por._ Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
    To walk unbraced and suck up the humours
    Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,[3084]
    And will he steal out of his wholesome bed,
    To dare the vile contagion of the night                          265
    And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus;[3085]
    You have some sick offence within your mind,
    Which by the right and virtue of my place
    I ought to know of: and, upon my knees,[3086]                    270
    I charm you, by my once commended beauty,[3087]
    By all your vows of love and that great vow
    Which did incorporate and make us one,
    That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
    Why you are heavy, and what men to-night                         275
    Have had resort to you; for here have been
    Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    Even from darkness.

    _Bru._              Kneel not, gentle Portia.[3088]

    _Por._ I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
    Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,[3089]              280
    Is it excepted I should know no secrets
    That appertain to you? Am I yourself
    But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
    To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,[3090]
    And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs[3091]      285
    Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
    Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.

    _Bru._ You are my true and honourable wife,
    As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
    That visit my sad heart.                                         290

    _Por._ If this were true, then should I know this secret.
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife:
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.[3092]                     295
    Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
    Being so father'd and so husbanded?
    Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em:[3093]
    I have made strong proof of my constancy,
    Giving myself a voluntary wound                                  300
    Here in the thigh: can I bear that with patience
    And not my husband's secrets?[3094]

    _Bru._                        O ye gods,
    Render me worthy of this noble wife!      [_Knocking within._[3095]
    Hark, hark! one knocks: Portia, go in awhile;
    And by and by thy bosom shall partake                            305
    The secrets of my heart:
    All my engagements I will construe to thee,
    All the charactery of my sad brows.
    Leave me with haste. [_Exit Portia._] Lucius, who's that knocks?[3096]

                   _Re-enter_ LUCIUS _with_ LIGARIUS.

    _Luc._ Here is a sick man that would speak with you.             310

    _Bru._ Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
    Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius! how?[3097]

    _Lig._ Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.

    _Bru._ O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
    To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!                     315

    _Lig._ I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
    Any exploit worthy the name of honour.

    _Bru._ Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
    Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.[3098]

    _Lig._ By all the gods that Romans bow before,[3099]             320
    I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
    Brave son, derived from honourable loins!
    Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
    And I will strive with things impossible,                        325
    Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?[3100]

    _Bru._ A piece of work that will make sick men whole.[3101]

    _Lig._ But are not some whole that we must make sick?

    _Bru._ That must we also. What it is, my Caius,[3102]
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going[3103]                    330
    To whom it must be done.[3103]

    _Lig._                   Set on your foot,
    And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
    To do I know not what: but it sufficeth
    That Brutus leads me on.

    _Bru._                   Follow me then.       [_Exeunt._[3104]


SCENE II. _CÃ¦sar's house._[3105]

    _Thunder and lightning. Enter_ CÃSAR, _in his night-gown_.[3106]

    _CÃ¦s._ Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night:[3107]
    Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
    'Help, ho! they murder CÃ¦sar!' Who's within?

                           _Enter a_ Servant.

    _Serv._ My lord?

    _CÃ¦s._ Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,                    5
    And bring me their opinions of success.

    _Serv._ I will, my lord.                                    [_Exit._

                           _Enter_ CALPURNIA.

    _Cal._ What mean you, CÃ¦sar? think you to walk forth?
    You shall not stir out of your house to-day.

    _CÃ¦s._ CÃ¦sar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me[3108]     10
    Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see
    The face of CÃ¦sar, they are vanished.

    _Cal._ CÃ¦sar, I never stood on ceremonies,
    Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
    Besides the things that we have heard and seen,                   15
    Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,[3109]
    In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,                     20
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,[3110]
    Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,[3111]
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.[3112]
    O CÃ¦sar! these things are beyond all use,                         25
    And I do fear them.

    _CÃ¦s._              What can be avoided
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet CÃ¦sar shall go forth; for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to CÃ¦sar.

    _Cal._ When beggars die, there are no comets seen;                30
    The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.

    _CÃ¦s._ Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    The valiant never taste of death but once.
    Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
    It seems to me most strange that men should fear;                 35
    Seeing that death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come.[3113]

                          _Re-enter_ Servant.

                                 What say the augurers?

    _Serv._ They would not have you to stir forth to-day.[3114]
    Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
    They could not find a heart within the beast.[3115]               40

    _CÃ¦s._ The gods do this in shame of cowardice:
    CÃ¦sar should be a beast without a heart
    If he should stay at home to-day for fear.
    No, CÃ¦sar shall not: danger knows full well[3116]
    That CÃ¦sar is more dangerous than he:[3116]                       45
    We are two lions litter'd in one day,[3116][3117]
    And I the elder and more terrible:[3116]
    And CÃ¦sar shall go forth.[3116]

    _Cal._                    Alas, my lord,
    Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    Do not go forth to-day: call it my fear                           50
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.
    We'll send Mark Antony to the senate-house,
    And he shall say you are not well to-day:[3118]
    Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.

    _CÃ¦s._ Mark Antony shall say I am not well,                       55
    And, for thy humour, I will stay at home.

                         _Enter_ DECIUS.[3119]

    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.

    _Dec._ CÃ¦sar, all hail! good morrow, worthy CÃ¦sar:
    I come to fetch you to the senate-house.

    _CÃ¦s._ And you are come in very happy time,                       60
    To bear my greeting to the senators
    And tell them that I will not come to-day:
    Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
    I will not come to-day: tell them so, Decius.

    _Cal._ Say he is sick.

    _CÃ¦s._                 Shall CÃ¦sar send a lie?                    65
    Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far,
    To be afeard to tell graybeards the truth?[3120]
    Decius, go tell them CÃ¦sar will not come.

    _Dec._ Most mighty CÃ¦sar, let me know some cause,
    Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.                         70

    _CÃ¦s._ The cause is in my will: I will not come;
    That is enough to satisfy the senate.
    But, for your private satisfaction,
    Because I love you, I will let you know.
    Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home:                        75
    She dreamt to-night she saw my statua,[3121][3122][3123]
    Which like a fountain with an hundred spouts[3121][3123][3124]
    Did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans[3121]
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it:[3121]
    And these does she apply for warnings and
        portents[3121][3125][3126]                                    80
    And evils imminent, and on her knee[3126]
    Hath begg'd that I will stay at home to-day.

    _Dec._ This dream is all amiss interpreted;
    It was a vision fair and fortunate:
    Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,                         85
    In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
    Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck[3127]
    Reviving blood, and that great men shall press[3128]
    For tinctures, stains, relics and cognizance.[3129]
    This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.                           90

    _CÃ¦s._ And this way have you well expounded it.

    _Dec._ I have, when you have heard what I can say:
    And know it now: the senate have concluded
    To give this day a crown to mighty CÃ¦sar.
    If you shall send them word you will not come,                    95
    Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
    Apt to be render'd, for some one to say[3130]
    'Break up the senate till another time,
    When CÃ¦sar's wife shall meet with better dreams.'
    If CÃ¦sar hide himself, shall they not whisper                    100
    'Lo, CÃ¦sar is afraid'?[3131]
    Pardon me, CÃ¦sar, for my dear dear love
    To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    And reason to my love is liable.

    _CÃ¦s._ How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!            105
    I am ashamed I did yield to them.[3132]
    Give me my robe, for I will go.[3133]

     _Enter_ PUBLIUS, BRUTUS, LIGARIUS, METELLUS, CASCA, TREBONIUS,
                           _and_ CINNA.[3134]

    And look where Publius is come to fetch me.[3135]

    _Pub._ Good morrow, CÃ¦sar.

    _CÃ¦s._                     Welcome, Publius.
    What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?                      110
    Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,[3136]
    CÃ¦sar was ne'er so much your enemy
    As that same ague which hath made you lean.
    What is't o'clock?

    _Bru._             CÃ¦sar, 'tis strucken eight.[3137]

    _CÃ¦s._ I thank you for your pains and courtesy.                  115

                            _Enter_ ANTONY.

    See! Antony, that revels long o' nights,[3138]
    Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.

    _Ant._ So to most noble CÃ¦sar.

    _CÃ¦s._                          Bid them prepare within:[3139]
    I am to blame to be thus waited for.[3140]
    Now, Cinna: now, Metellus: what, Trebonius!                      120
    I have an hour's talk in store for you;
    Remember that you call on me to-day:
    Be near me, that I may remember you.

    _Treb._ CÃ¦sar, I will. [_Aside_] And so near will I be,[3141]
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.            125

    _CÃ¦s._ Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me;
    And we like friends will straightway go together.

    _Bru._ [_Aside_] That every like is not the same, O CÃ¦sar,[3142]
    The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon![3143]      [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A street near the Capitol._[3144]

             _Enter_ ARTEMIDORUS, _reading a paper_.[3145]

    _Art._ 'CÃ¦sar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius;[3146]
    come not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna; trust not[3146]
    Trebonius; mark well Metellus Cimber: Decius Brutus[3146]
    loves thee not: thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius.
        There[3146][3147][3148]
    is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent
        against[3146][3148][3149]                                      5
    CÃ¦sar. If thou beest not immortal, look about you: security[3146][3150]
    gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods defend[3146]
    thee![3146]

                        Thy lover, ARTEMIDORUS.'

    Here will I stand till CÃ¦sar pass along,                          10
    And as a suitor will I give him this.
    My heart laments that virtue cannot live
    Out of the teeth of emulation.[3151]
    If thou read this, O CÃ¦sar, thou mayst live;[3152]
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.[3153]      [_Exit._  15


SCENE IV. _Another part of the same street, before the house of
Brutus._[3154]

                      _Enter_ PORTIA _and_ LUCIUS.

    _Por._ I prithee, boy, run to the senate-house;
    Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
    Why dost thou stay?

    _Luc._              To know my errand, madam.

    _Por._ I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.                   5
    O constancy, be strong upon my side![3155]
    Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue![3155]
    I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.[3155][3156]
    How hard it is for women to keep counsel![3155]
    Art thou here yet?[3155]

    _Luc._             Madam, what should I do?                       10
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
    And so return to you, and nothing else?

    _Por._ Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,[3157]
    For he went sickly forth: and take good note
    What CÃ¦sar doth, what suitors press to him.                       15
    Hark, boy! what noise is that?

    _Luc._ I hear none, madam.

    _Por._                     Prithee, listen well:
    I heard a bustling rumour like a fray,[3158]
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.

    _Luc._ Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

                        _Enter the_ Soothsayer.

    _Por._                          Come hither, fellow:[3159][3160]  20
    Which way hast thou been?[3160][3161]

    _Sooth._                  At mine own house, good lady.

    _Por._ What is't o'clock?[3162]

    _Sooth._                  About the ninth hour, lady.

    _Por._ Is CÃ¦sar yet gone to the Capitol?

    _Sooth._ Madam, not yet: I go to take my stand,
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.                                25

    _Por._ Thou hast some suit to CÃ¦sar, hast thou not?

    _Sooth._ That I have, lady: if it will please CÃ¦sar[3163]
    To be so good to CÃ¦sar as to hear me,
    I shall beseech him to befriend himself.[3164]

    _Por._ Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?[3165]   30

    _Sooth._ None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.[3166]
    Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow:
    The throng that follows CÃ¦sar at the heels,
    Of senators, of prÃ¦tors, common suitors,
    Will crowd a feeble man almost to death:                          35
    I'll get me to a place more void and there
    Speak to great CÃ¦sar as he comes along.                     [_Exit._

    _Por._ I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing[3167]
    The heart of woman is! O Brutus,[3168]
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!                       40
    Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
    That CÃ¦sar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
    Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    Say I am merry: come to me again,
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.[3169]                 45

                                                    [_Exeunt severally._

FOOTNOTES:

[3004] ACT II. SCENE I.] Rowe. Actus Secundus. Ff.

[3005] Rome.... Enter Brutus.] Malone. Enter Brutus in his Orchard. Ff.
A garden. Enter Brutus. Rowe. Brutus's Garden.... Theobald.

[3006] _when?_] Ff. _when!_ Delius.

[3007] _him?--that;--_] _him--that--_ Rowe. _him that_, Ff.
_him!--that!_ Delius.

[3008] _climber-upward_] Hyphened first by Warburton.

[3009] _upmost_] _topmost_ Anon. conj.

[3010] _lest_] F2 F3 F4. _least_ F1.

_may_] _do_ Seymour conj.

[3011] Enter....] Re-enter.... Capell.

[3012] Gives....] Ff. om. Capell.

[3013] _ides_] Theobald (Warburton). _first_ Ff.

[3014] _Rome, &c._] Ff. _Rome,--_ Rowe.

[3015] _took_] _ta'en_ Seymour conj.

[3016] _What, Rome?_] Rowe. _What Rome?_ Ff.

[3017] _ancestors_] _ancestor_ Dyce (ed. 2).

[3018] _Speak, ... entreated_] Printed as two lines by Craik.

_entreated_] _entreated then_ Pope.

[3019] _thee_] F1 F4. _the_ F2 F3.

[3020] _receivest_] Ff. _receiv'st_ Rowe.

[3021] _fifteen_] Ff. _fourteen_ Theobald (Warburton). _now, full
fourteen_ Seymour conj.

Knocking within.] Collier. Knocke within. F1 F2. Knock within F3 F4.
Knocking without. Staunton.

[3022] [Exit Lucius.] Theobald. om. Ff.

[3023] _instruments_] _instrument_ Smith conj. ap. Grey.

[3024] _man_] F2 F3 F4. _a man_ F1.

[3025] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter.... Ff.

[3026] _moe_] Ff. _more_ Rowe.

[3027] See note (II).

[3028] _cloaks_] _cloakes_ F1. _cloathes_ F2. _cloaths_ F3 F4.

[3029] _'em_] F1 F2 F3. _them_ F4.

[3030] _Seek_] om. Seymour conj.

[3031] _it in_] _in it_ Reed (1803).

[3032] _path, thy ... on_,] F2. _path thy ... on,_ F1 F3 F4. _hath
thy ... on_, Quarto (1691). _march, thy ... on_, Pope. _put thy ...
on,_ Dyce, ed. 2 (Southern MS., Long MS., and Coleridge conj.). _put'st
thy ... on_, Singer conj. _hadst thy ... on,_ Grant White conj. _pall
thy ... o'er,_ Heraud conj. _walk, thy ... on_, Sawyer conj. _pass,
thy ... on_, Anon. conj. ('Footsteps of Shakspere', p. 32). _parle,
thy ... on_, Nicholson conj. _pace, thy ... on,_ Anon. conj.

[3033] the conspirators] om. Rowe.

[3034] SCENE II. Pope.

[3035] [Aside. Rowe.

[3036] _This ... Cimber._] Two lines in Rowe.

_This ... Cinna_] _This valiant Casca; Cinna, this_ Seymour conj.

_this, Cinna_] _Cinna, this_, Capell.

[3037] _all welcome_] _welcome, all_ Seymour conj.

[3038] _themselves_] om. Steevens conj., ending the line _betwixt._

[3039] [They whisper.] Ff. Converse apart. Capell.

[3040] _if not the face_] _if that the face_ Theobald. _if that the
fate_ Warburton. _if not the faith_ Mason conj. _if not the faiths_
Malone conj. _if not the fate_ Keightley.

[3041] _abuse,--_] Theobald. _abuse_; Ff.

[3042] _high-sighted_] _high-sieged_ Warburton conj. (withdrawn).
_high-seated_ Theobald conj.

[3043] _women, then_] _women; Then_ F2 F3 F4. _women. Then_ F1.

[3044] _Romans_] _Romans'_ Anon. conj.

[3045] _palter_] _faulter_ Long MS.

[3046] _it?_] Theobald. _it._ Ff.

[3047] _That_] _As_ Seymour conj.

[3048] _stain_] _strain_ Warburton conj.

[3049] _Did_] _Doth_ Hanmer.

_oath; when_] Capell. _oath: when_ Hanmer. _oath. When_ Ff.

[3050] _do_] _doth_ F4.

[3051] _Indeed ... CÃ¦sar?_ Given to 'Dec.' by Hanmer.

[3052] _Let us ... Caius._] Theobald. _Let's ... Caius._ Ff. _Let's ...
Cassius._ Rowe. _Let us ... butchers._ Pope (omitting _Caius_).

[3053] _men_] _man_ Pope.

[3054] _spirit_] F1. _spirits_ F2 F3 F4.

[3055] _And_] _Nor_ Seymour conj.

[3056] _'em_] _them_ F4.

_make_] _mark_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[3057] _We ... purgers_] _Purgers we shall be call'd_ Seymour conj.

_call'd purgers_] _purgers call'd_ Staunton conj.

[3058] _fear_] _do fear_ Pope.

[3059] _in_] om. Pope.

_CÃ¦sar--_] Rowe. _CÃ¦sar._ Ff.

[3060] _himself, take_] _himself take_ Pope.

[3061] _to wildness_] See note (III).

[3062] _this_] See note (III).

[3063] _stricken_] Ff. _strucken_ Steevens (1778).

[3064] _Whether_] _If_ Pope. _Whe'r_ Capell.

[3065] _main_] _mean_ Mason conj.

[3066] _fantasy_] _fantasies_ Hanmer.

[3067] _trees ... glasses ... holes_] _stoles ... glas ... trees_
Smith, ap. Grey, conj.

[3068] _flatterers_:] _flatterers._ Ff. _flatterers_; Craik.

[3069] _Let me work_] _Leave me to work_ Pope. _Let me to work_
Steevens conj. _Let me work on him; I can humour him_ Seymour conj.

[3070] _eighth_] F4. _eight_ F1 F2 F3.

[3071] _hard_] F1. _hatred_ F2 F3 F4.

[3072] _by him_] _to him_ Pope.

[3073] _reasons_] _reason_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[3074] _The ... Brutus_:] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_upon's_] _upon us_ Capell.

[3075] [Exeunt....] Exeunt. Manet Brutus. Ff.

[3076] _honey-heavy dew_] _hony-heavy-Dew_ Ff. _honey heavy dew_
Johnson. _heavy honey-dew_ Collier (Collier MS. and Singer MS.).

[3077] SCENE III. Pope.

[3078] _raw cold_] _raw-cold_ Steevens (1793).

[3079] _You've_] Rowe. _Y'have_ Ff. _You have_ Steevens.

[3080] _Stole_] _Stol'n_ Johnson.

[3081] _further_] _farther_ Collier.

[3082] _wafture_] Rowe. _wafter_ Ff.

[3083] _you, Brutus_] F4. _you Brutus_ F1 F2 F3.

[3084] _dank_] _danke_ F1. _darke_ F2. _dark_ F3 F4.

[3085] _his_] _hit_ F1.

[3086] [Kneeling. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3087] _charm_] F3 F4. _charme_ F1 F2. _charge_ Pope.

[3088] [raising her. Capell.

[3089] _the_] _tho_ F1.

[3090] _comfort_] _consort_ Theobald.

[3091] _sometimes_] om. Pope.

[3092] _reputed, Cato's_] _reputed: Cato's_ Ff. _reputed Cato's_
Warburton.

[3093] _'em_] _them_ F4.

[3094] _secrets_] _secret_ Capell conj.

[3095] [Knocking within.] Malone. Knock within. Capell. Knocke F1 F2.
Knock. F3 F4.

[3096] _who's that_] _who's there that_ Pope. _who's that that_ Capell.
_who is that_ Steevens. _who is't that_ Collier (one volume edition).

Re-enter....] Dyce. Enter Lucius and Ligarius. Ff (after 'Exit Portia').

[3097] [Exit Luc. Capell.

[3098] _a_] _an_ F4.

[3099] _that Romans_] _the Romans_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3100] _Yea_] _Yet_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3101] _A ... whole._] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3102] _must we_] _we must_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3103] _going To_] Craik. _going, To_ Ff.

[3104] [Exeunt.] Pope. Thunder. Exeunt. Ff.

[3105] SCENE II.] Rowe. SCENE IV. Pope.

CÃ¦sar's house.] CÃ¦sar's Palace. Rowe. A room in CÃ¦sar's Palace. Capell.

[3106] Enter CÃ¦sar....] Enter Julius CÃ¦sar.... Ff.

in his night-gown] om. Pope.

[3107] _Nor ... to-night_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3108] _threaten'd_] _threaten_ S. Walker conj.

[3109] _fight_] _fought_ Grant White (Dyce, ed. 2). _did fight_
Keightley.

[3110] _hurtled_] F1. _hurried_ F2 F3 F4.

[3111] _did neigh_] _do neigh_ F1.

[3112] _ghosts_] _ghost_ F4.

[3113] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter.... Ff.

_augurers_] _augurs_ Pope. _augures_ S. Walker conj.

[3114] _to stir_] _stir_ F4.

[3115] [Exit Servant. Theobald.

[3116] _No ... forth._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[3117] _are_] Capell (Upton conj.). _heare_ F1 F2. _hear_ F3 F4.
_heard_ Rowe. _were_ Theobald.

[3118] _shall_] _will_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3119] SCENE V. Pope.

[3120] _afeard_] _afraid_ F4.

[3121] Malone conjectures that the lines should end _statue, which ...
run ... came ... these ... portents_.

[3122] _to-night_] _to nigh_ F2. _last night_ Rowe.

[3123] _statua, Which like_] Steevens (1793). _statue, Which like_ Ff.
_statue, which Like to_ Hanmer. _statue, Decius, Which, like_ Capell.

[3124] _an_] _a_ Collier.

[3125] _And ... apply_] _These she applies_ Pope.

[3126] _and portents And_] _and portents Of_ Hanmer. _portents Of_
Capell.

[3127] _great Rome_] _our Rome_ Capell conj.

[3128] _press_] After this Warburton marks an omission of some lines.

[3129] _cognizance_] _cognisances_ Hanmer.

[3130] _render'd_] _rendered_ Craik.

[3131] _Lo_,] _Lord_ Anon. conj.

[3132] _ashamed_] _asham'd_ Warburton.

[3133] [to an Att. Capell.

[3134] Enter Publius, Brutus, ... and Cinna.] Malone, after Capell.
Enter Brutus, ... Cynna, and Publius. Ff.

[3135] SCENE VI. Pope.

[3136] _Caius_] _Oh Caius_ Hanmer.

[3137] _o'_] Theobald. _a_ Ff.

_strucken_] _stricken_ Johnson.

[3138] _See!_] _See_, F1 F2. _See_ F3 F4.

_o' nights_] Theobald. _a-nights_ Ff.

[3139] _Bid ... within_] _Bid prepare_ Seymour conj.

[to an Att. Capell.

[3140] _to blame_] F3 F4. _too blame_ F1 F2.

[3141] [Aside] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3142] [Aside] Pope. om. Ff.

[3143] _yearns_] Capell. _earnes_ F1 F2 F3. _earns_ F4. _yerns_
Theobald.

[3144] SCENE III.] Rowe. SCENE VII. Pope. SCENE V. Jennens.

A street ...] Theobald. The Street. Rowe.

[3145] reading a paper] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3146] _CÃ¦sar ... thee!_] As nine lines of verse, S. Walker conj.

[3147] _thou hast_] _th' hast_ S. Walker conj.

[3148] _There is_] _There's_ S. Walker conj.

[3149] _against_] _'gainst_ S. Walker conj.

[3150] _you_] _thee_ Rowe.

[3151] _teeth_] _reach_ Anon. conj.

[3152] _mayst_] _may'st_ Rowe. _mayest_ Ff.

[3153] [Exit.] Rowe. om. Ff. Scene closes. Jennens conj.

[3154] SCENE IV.] Capell. Rowe and Pope continue the Scene. SCENE VI.
Jennens.

Another ...] Capell.

[3155] _O ... counsel!_] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[3156] _might_] _heart_ Capell.

[3157] _boy_] om. F4.

[3158] _heard_] _hear_ Knight (National ed.).

_bustling_] Rowe. _bussling_ Ff.

[3159] Enter the Soothsayer.] Ff. Enter Artemidorus. Rowe.

[3160] _Come ... been?_] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[3161] Sooth.] Art. Rowe.

[3162] _o'_] Theobald. _a_ Ff.

[3163] _lady: if ... me_,] _lady. If ... me,_ Johnson. _lady, if ...
me_: Ff.

[3164] _befriend_] _defend_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3165] _Why ... him?_] Printed as prose in Ff.

_harm's_] _harm_ Pope.

[3166] _None ... chance_] One line in Pope, omitting _may chance_. Two
lines in Ff.

_much ... chance_] _much, fear, will chance_ Seymour conj.

[3167] _I must ... thing_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_Ay_] _Aye_ Ff. ah Johnson.

[3168] _Brutus_,] _Brutus! Brutus!_ Pope.

[3169] [Exeunt severally.] Theobald. Exeunt. F1. om. F2 F3 F4.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above._[3170]

   _A crowd of people; among them_ ARTEMIDORUS _and the_ Soothsayer.
       _Flourish. Enter_ CÃSAR, BRUTUS, CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS,
        METELLUS, TREBONIUS, CINNA, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POPILIUS,
                     PUBLIUS, _and others_.[3171]

    _CÃ¦s._ The ides of March are come.

    _Sooth._ Ay, CÃ¦sar; but not gone.

    _Art._ Hail, CÃ¦sar! read this schedule.[3172]

    _Dec._ Trebonius doth desire you to o'er-read,
    At your best leisure, this his humble suit.                        5

    _Art._ O CÃ¦sar, read mine first; for mine's a suit
    That touches CÃ¦sar nearer: read it, great CÃ¦sar.[3173]

    _CÃ¦s._ What touches us ourself shall be last served.

    _Art._ Delay not, CÃ¦sar; read it instantly.[3174]

    _CÃ¦s._ What, is the fellow mad?

    _Pub._                          Sirrah, give place.               10

    _Cas._ What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.

     _CÃSAR goes up to the Senate-house, the rest following._[3175]

    _Pop._ I wish your enterprise to-day may thrive.[3176]

    _Cas._ What enterprise, Popilius?

    _Pop._                            Fare you well.

                                             [_Advances to CÃ¦sar._[3177]

    _Bru._ What said Popilius Lena?[3178]                             15

    _Cas._ He wish'd to-day our enterprise might thrive.[3178]
    I fear our purpose is discovered.[3178]

    _Bru._ Look, how he makes to CÃ¦sar: mark him.[3178][3179]

    _Cas._                                        Casca,[3178][3180]
    Be sudden, for we fear prevention.[3178][3180]
    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,[3178][3181]         20
    Cassius or CÃ¦sar never shall turn back,[3178][3182]
    For I will slay myself.[3178][3183]

    _Bru._                  Cassius, be constant:[3178]
    Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;[3178][3184]
    For, look, he smiles, and CÃ¦sar doth not change.[3178]

    _Cas._ Trebonius knows his time; for, look you, Brutus,[3178]     25
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.[3178][3185]

                                         [_Exeunt Antony and Trebonius._

    _Dec._ Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go,[3178]
    And presently prefer his suit to CÃ¦sar.[3178]

    _Bru._ He is address'd: press near and second him.[3178]

    _Cin._ Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.[3178][3186]  30

    _CÃ¦s._ Are we all ready? What is now amiss[3187]
    That CÃ¦sar and his senate must redress?

    _Met._ Most high, most mighty and most puissant CÃ¦sar,
    Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
    An humble heart:--                                      [_Kneeling._

    _CÃ¦s._             I must prevent thee, Cimber.[3188]             35
    These couchings and these lowly courtesies[3189]
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men,[3190]
    And turn pre-ordinance and first decree[3191]
    Into the law of children. Be not fond,[3192]
    To think that CÃ¦sar bears such rebel blood                        40
    That will be thaw'd from the true quality
    With that which melteth fools, I mean, sweet words,
    Low-crooked court'sies and base spaniel-fawning.[3193]
    Thy brother by decree is banished:
    If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,                      45
    I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
    Know, CÃ¦sar doth not wrong, nor without cause[3194]
    Will he be satisfied.

    _Met._ Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    To sound more sweetly in great CÃ¦sar's ear                        50
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?

    _Bru._ I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, CÃ¦sar,
    Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
    Have an immediate freedom of repeal.

    _CÃ¦s._ What, Brutus!

    _Cas._               Pardon, CÃ¦sar; CÃ¦sar, pardon:                55
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,[3195]
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.

    _CÃ¦s._ I could be well moved, if I were as you;
    If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:
    But I am constant as the northern star,                           60
    Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality[3196][3197]
    There is no fellow in the firmament.[3196]
    The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;[3196]
    They are all fire and every one doth shine;[3196]
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place:[3196]             65
    So in the world; 'tis furnish'd well with men,[3196]
    And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;[3196]
    Yet in the number I do know but one[3196]
    That unassailable holds on his rank,[3196][3198]
    Unshaked of motion: and that I am he,[3196][3199]                 70
    Let me a little show it, even in this;
    That I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
    And constant do remain to keep him so.

    _Cin._ O CÃ¦sar,--[3200]

    _CÃ¦s._            Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?

    _Dec._ Great CÃ¦sar,--[3201]

    _CÃ¦s._                Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?[3201][3202]  75

    _Casca._ Speak, hands, for me![3203]

                         [_Casca first, then the other Conspirators and_
                                             _Marcus Brutus stab CÃ¦sar._

    _CÃ¦s._ Et tu, Brute? Then fall, CÃ¦sar![3204]      [_Dies._

    _Cin._ Liberty! freedom! Tyranny is dead!
    Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.

    _Cas._ Some to the common pulpits, and cry out                    80
    'Liberty, freedom and enfranchisement!'

    _Bru._ People, and senators, be not affrighted;
    Fly not; stand still: ambition's debt is paid.

    _Casca._ Go to the pulpit, Brutus.

    _Dec._ And Cassius too.                                           85

    _Bru._ Where's Publius?

    _Cin._ Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.

    _Met._ Stand fast together, lest some friend of CÃ¦sar's[3205]
    Should chance--

    _Bru._ Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer;                 90
    There is no harm intended to your person,
    Nor to no Roman else: so tell them, Publius.

    _Cas._ And leave us, Publius; lest that the people
    Rushing on us should do your age some mischief.

    _Bru._ Do so: and let no man abide this deed                      95
    But we the doers.[3206]

                      _Re-enter_ TREBONIUS.[3207]

    _Cas._ Where is Antony?[3208]

    _Tre._                  Fled to his house amazed:
    Men, wives and children stare, cry out and run
    As it were doomsday.

    _Bru._               Fates, we will know your pleasures:[3209]
    That we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time,                   100
    And drawing days out, that men stand upon.

    _Cas._ Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life[3210]
    Cuts off so many years of fearing death.

    _Bru._ Grant that, and then is death a benefit:
    So are we CÃ¦sar's friends, that have abridged                    105
    His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,[3211]
    And let us bathe our hands in CÃ¦sar's blood[3211]
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords:[3211]
    Then walk we forth, even to the market-place,[3211]
    And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,[3211]                 110
    Let's all cry 'Peace, freedom and liberty!'[3211]

    _Cas._ Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence[3212]
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over[3213]
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown![3214]

    _Bru._ How many times shall CÃ¦sar bleed in sport,[3215]          115
    That now on Pompey's basis lies along[3216]
    No worthier than the dust![3217]

    _Cas._                     So oft as that shall be,
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.[3218]

    _Dec._ What, shall we forth?

    _Cas._                       Ay, every man away:[3219]           120
    Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.[3220]

                        _Enter a_ Servant.[3221]

    _Bru._ Soft! who comes here? A friend of Antony's.[3222]

    _Serv._ Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel;[3223]
    Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down;                           125
    And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:[3224]
    Brutus is noble, wise, valiant and honest;
    CÃ¦sar was mighty, bold, royal and loving:[3225]
    Say I love Brutus and I honour him;
    Say I fear'd CÃ¦sar, honour'd him and loved him.                  130
    If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
    May safely come to him and be resolved
    How CÃ¦sar hath deserved to lie in death,
    Mark Antony shall not love CÃ¦sar dead
    So well as Brutus living, but will follow                        135
    The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
    Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    With all true faith. So says my master Antony.[3226]

    _Bru._ Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
    I never thought him worse.[3227]                                 140
    Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    He shall be satisfied and, by my honour,
    Depart untouch'd.

    _Serv._           I'll fetch him presently.      [_Exit._[3228]

    _Bru._ I know that we shall have him well to friend.

    _Cas._ I wish we may: but yet have I a mind[3229]                145
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.[3230]

                           _Re-enter_ ANTONY.

    _Bru._ But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.[3231]

    _Ant._ O mighty CÃ¦sar! dost thou lie so low?[3232]
    Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,                150
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
    I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:
    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    As CÃ¦sar's death's hour, nor no instrument[3233]                 155
    Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
    I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,[3234]
    Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
    Fulfil your pleasure. Live a thousand years,                     160
    I shall not find myself so apt to die:
    No place will please me so, no mean of death,[3235]
    As here by CÃ¦sar, and by you cut off,
    The choice and master spirits of this age.

    _Bru._ O Antony, beg not your death of us.                       165
    Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    As, by our hands and this our present act,
    You see we do; yet see you but our hands
    And this the bleeding business they have done:
    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;                        170
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome--
    As fire drives out fire, so pity pity--
    Hath done this deed on CÃ¦sar. For your part,[3236]
    To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony:[3236]
    Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts[3237]             175
    Of brothers' temper, do receive you in[3238]
    With all kind love, good thoughts and reverence.

    _Cas._ Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.

    _Bru._ Only be patient till we have appeased                     180
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Why I, that did love CÃ¦sar when I struck him,[3239]
    Have thus proceeded.

    _Ant._               I doubt not of your wisdom.[3240]
    Let each man render me his bloody hand:[3241]                    185
    First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
    Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
    Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
    Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
    Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.           190
    Gentlemen all,--alas, what shall I say?[3242]
    My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    Either a coward or a flatterer.
    That I did love thee, CÃ¦sar, O, 'tis true:[3243]                 195
    If then thy spirit look upon us now,
    Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death,
    To see thy Antony making his peace,
    Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,[3244]
    Most noble! in the presence of thy corse?[3244]                  200
    Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
    Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
    It would become me better than to close
    In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
    Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart;[3245]       205
    Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
    Sign'd in thy spoil and crimson'd in thy lethe.[3246]
    O world, thou wast the forest to this hart;[3247]
    And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.[3247][3248]
    How like a deer strucken by many princes[3247][3249]             210
    Dost thou here lie![3247]

    _Cas._ Mark Antony,--

    _Ant._                Pardon me, Caius Cassius:[3250]
    The enemies of CÃ¦sar shall say this;
    Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

    _Cas._ I blame you not for praising CÃ¦sar so;                    215
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?

    _Ant._ Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on CÃ¦sar.                  220
    Friends am I with you all and love you all,
    Upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    Why and wherein CÃ¦sar was dangerous.

    _Bru._ Or else were this a savage spectacle:[3251]
    Our reasons are so full of good regard                           225
    That were you, Antony, the son of CÃ¦sar,[3252]
    You should be satisfied.

    _Ant._                   That's all I seek:
    And am moreover suitor that I may
    Produce his body to the market-place,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,                          230
    Speak in the order of his funeral.

    _Bru._ You shall, Mark Antony.

    _Cas._                         Brutus, a word with you.[3253]
    [_Aside to Bru._] You know not what you do: do not consent[3254]
    That Antony speak in his funeral:
    Know you how much the people may be moved                        235
    By that which he will utter?[3255]

    _Bru._                       By your pardon:
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our CÃ¦sar's death:
    What Antony shall speak, I will protest
    He speaks by leave and by permission,                            240
    And that we are contented CÃ¦sar shall
    Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.[3256]
    It shall advantage more than do us wrong.

    _Cas._ I know not what may fall; I like it not.[3257]

    _Bru._ Mark Antony, here, take you CÃ¦sar's body.[3258]           245
    You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    But speak all good you can devise of CÃ¦sar;
    And say you do't by our permission;
    Else shall you not have any hand at all[3259]
    About his funeral: and you shall speak                           250
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
    After my speech is ended.

    _Ant._                    Be it so;
    I do desire no more.

    _Bru._ Prepare the body then, and follow us.

                                         [_Exeunt all but Antony._[3260]

    _Ant._ O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,[3261]         255
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.
    Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood![3262]
    Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,                               260
    Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue,
    A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;[3263]
    Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;                             265
    Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
    And dreadful objects so familiar,
    That mothers shall but smile when they behold
    Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;[3264]
    All pity choked with custom of fell deeds:                       270
    And CÃ¦sar's spirit ranging for revenge,
    With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    Cry 'Havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war;[3265]
    That this foul deed shall smell above the earth                  275
    With carrion men, groaning for burial.[3266]

                           _Enter a_ Servant.

    You serve Octavius CÃ¦sar, do you not?

    _Serv._ I do, Mark Antony.

    _Ant._ CÃ¦sar did write for him to come to Rome.[3267]

    _Serv._ He did receive his letters, and is coming;               280
    And bid me say to you by word of mouth--
    O CÃ¦sar!              [_Seeing the body._[3268]

    _Ant._ Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,[3269]
    Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,[3270]               285
    Began to water. Is thy master coming?[3271]

    _Serv._ He lies to-night within seven leagues of Rome.

    _Ant._ Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced:[3272]
    Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
    No Rome of safety for Octavius yet;[3273]                        290
    Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile;
    Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse[3274]
    Into the market-place: there shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men;                             295
    According to the which, thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.
    Lend me your hand.       [_Exeunt with CÃ¦sar's body._[3275]


SCENE II. _The Forum._[3276]

    _Enter_ BRUTUS _and_ CASSIUS, _and a throng of_ Citizens.[3277]

    _Citizens._ We will be satisfied; let us be satisfied.[3278]

    _Bru._ Then follow me, and give me audience, friends.
    Cassius, go you into the other street,
    And part the numbers.
    Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;[3279]            5
    Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
    And public reasons shall be rendered[3280]
    Of CÃ¦sar's death.

    _First Cit._      I will hear Brutus speak.

    _Sec. Cit._ I will hear Cassius; and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.[3280][3281]                 10

         [_Exit Cassius, with some of the Citizens. Brutus goes into the
                                                                pulpit._

    _Third Cit._ The noble Brutus is ascended: silence!

    _Bru._ Be patient till the last.
    Romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my cause,[3282]
    and be silent, that you may hear: believe me for mine honour,
    and have respect to mine honour, that you may believe: censure    15
    me in your wisdom, and awake your senses, that you
    may the better judge. If there be any in this assembly, any
    dear friend of CÃ¦sar's, to him I say that Brutus' love to[3283]
    CÃ¦sar was no less than his. If then that friend demand why
    Brutus rose against CÃ¦sar, this is my answer: not that I          20
    loved CÃ¦sar less, but that I loved Rome more. Had you
    rather CÃ¦sar were living, and die all slaves, than that CÃ¦sar
    were dead, to live all free-men? As CÃ¦sar loved me, I weep[3284]
    for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was
    valiant, I honour him; but as he was ambitions, I slew him.       25
    There is tears for his love; joy for his fortune; honour for[3285]
    his valour; and death for his ambition. Who is here so base[3286][3287]
    that would be a bondman? If any, speak; for him have I[3286]
    offended. Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman?[3286]
    If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so vile[3286]  30
    that will not love his country? If any, speak; for him have[3286]
    I offended. I pause for a reply.[3286][3288]

    _All._ None, Brutus, none.[3289]

    _Bru._ Then none have I offended. I have done no more
    to CÃ¦sar than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his         35
    death is enrolled in the Capitol; his glory not extenuated,
    wherein he was worthy, nor his offences enforced, for which
    he suffered death.[3290]

           _Enter_ ANTONY _and others, with_ CÃSAR'S _body_.

    Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony: who,
    though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the[3291]       40
    benefit of his dying, a place in the commonwealth; as[3291]
    which of you shall not? With this I depart,--that, as I
    slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the same
    dagger for myself, when it shall please my country to need
    my death.[3292]                                                   45

    _All._ Live, Brutus! live, live![3293][3294]

    _First Cit._ Bring him with triumph home unto his house.

    _Sec. Cit._ Give him a statue with his ancestors.

    _Third Cit._ Let him be CÃ¦sar.

    _Fourth Cit._                   CÃ¦sar's better parts
    Shall be crown'd in Brutus.[3295]                                 50

    _First Cit._ We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
        clamours.[3296]

    _Bru._ My countrymen,--[3297]

    _Sec. Cit._              Peace! silence! Brutus speaks.

    _First Cit._ Peace, ho!

    _Bru._ Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
    And, for my sake, stay here with Antony:                          55
    Do grace to CÃ¦sar's corpse, and grace his speech
    Tending to CÃ¦sar's glories, which Mark Antony[3298]
    By our permission is allow'd to make.
    I do entreat you, not a man depart,
    Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.                   [_Exit._  60

    _First Cit._ Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.[3299]

    _Third Cit._ Let him go up into the public chair;
    We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.

    _Ant._ For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.[3300]

                                          [_Goes into the pulpit._[3301]

    _Fourth Cit._ What does he say of Brutus?[3302]

    _Third Cit._              He says, for Brutus' sake,[3302][3303]  65
    He finds himself beholding to us all.[3300]

    _Fourth Cit._ 'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.[3304]

    _First Cit._ This CÃ¦sar was a tyrant.

    _Third Cit._                          Nay, that's certain:
    We are blest that Rome is rid of him.[3305]

    _Sec. Cit._ Peace! let us hear what Antony can say.               70

    _Ant._ You gentle Romans,--[3294][3306]

    _All._                      Peace, ho! let us hear him.

    _Ant._ Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
    I come to bury CÃ¦sar, not to praise him.
    The evil that men do lives after them;
    The good is oft interred with their bones;[3307]                  75
    So let it be with CÃ¦sar. The noble Brutus[3308]
    Hath told you CÃ¦sar was ambitious:
    If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    And grievously hath CÃ¦sar answer'd it.
    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest,--                       80
    For Brutus is an honourable man;
    So are they all, all honourable men,--
    Come I to speak in CÃ¦sar's funeral.
    He was my friend, faithful and just to me:
    But Brutus says he was ambitious;                                 85
    And Brutus is an honourable man.
    He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
    Did this in CÃ¦sar seem ambitious?
    When that the poor have cried, CÃ¦sar hath wept:                   90
    Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
    And Brutus is an honourable man.
    You all did see that on the Lupercal[3309]
    I thrice presented him a kingly crown,                            95
    Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
    And, sure, he is an honourable man.
    I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
    But here I am to speak what I do know.                           100
    You all did love him once, not without cause:
    What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    O judgement! thou art fled to brutish beasts,[3310]
    And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with CÃ¦sar,                      105
    And I must pause till it come back to me.

    _First Cit._ Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.

    _Sec. Cit._ If thou consider rightly of the matter,
    CÃ¦sar has had great wrong.[3311]

    _Third Cit._               Has he, masters?[3312][3313]
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.[3313]               110

    _Fourth Cit._ Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
    Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.

    _First Cit._ If it be found so, some will dear abide it.

    _Sec. Cit._ Poor soul! his eyes are red as fire with weeping.

    _Third Cit._ There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.       115

    _Fourth Cit._ Now mark him, he begins again to speak.[3314]

    _Ant._ But yesterday the word of CÃ¦sar might
    Have stood against the world: now lies he there,
    And none so poor to do him reverence.
    O masters, if I were disposed to stir                            120
    Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
    I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
    Who, you all know, are honourable men:
    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,                      125
    Than I will wrong such honourable men.
    But here's a parchment with the seal of CÃ¦sar;
    I found it in his closet; 'tis his will:
    Let but the commons hear this testament--
    Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read--                        130
    And they would go and kiss dead CÃ¦sar's wounds
    And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
    Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,[3315]
    And, dying, mention it within their wills,
    Bequeathing it as a rich legacy                                  135
    Unto their issue.

    _Fourth Cit._ We'll hear the will: read it, Mark Antony.

    _All._ The will, the will! we will hear CÃ¦sar's will.[3294]

    _Ant._ Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
    It is not meet you know how CÃ¦sar loved you.                     140
    You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
    And, being men, hearing the will of CÃ¦sar,
    It will inflame you, it will make you mad:[3316]
    'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs;
    For if you should, O, what would come of it!                     145

    _Fourth Cit._ Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony;[3317][3318]
    You shall read us the will, CÃ¦sar's will.[3318][3319]

    _Ant._ Will you be patient? will you stay awhile?
    I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it:
    I fear I wrong the honourable men                                150
    Whose daggers have stabb'd CÃ¦sar; I do fear it.

    _Fourth Cit._ They were traitors: honourable men![3320]

    _All._ The will! the testament![3294][3320]

    _Sec. Cit._ They were villains, murderers: the will! read[3320]
    the will.                                                        155

    _Ant._ You will compel me then to read the will?[3321]
    Then make a ring about the corpse of CÃ¦sar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
    Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?

    _All._ Come down.[3322]                                          160

    _Sec. Cit._ Descend.      [_He comes down from the pulpit._[3323]

    _Third Cit._ You shall have leave.

    _Fourth Cit._ A ring; stand round.

    _First Cit._ Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.

    _Sec. Cit._ Room for Antony, most noble Antony.                  165

    _Ant._ Nay, press not so upon me; stand far off.

    _All._ Stand back. Room! Bear back.

    _Ant._ If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    You all do know this mantle: I remember
    The first time ever CÃ¦sar put it on;                             170
    'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    That day he overcame the Nervii:
    Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through:[3324]
    See what a rent the envious Casca made:
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;                    175
    And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    Mark how the blood of CÃ¦sar follow'd it,
    As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no:
    For Brutus, as you know, was CÃ¦sar's angel:                      180
    Judge, O you gods, how dearly CÃ¦sar loved him!
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;[3325]
    For when the noble CÃ¦sar saw him stab,
    Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,[3326]
    Quite vanquish'd him: then burst his mighty heart;               185
    And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
    Even at the base of Pompey's statua,[3327][3328]
    Which all the while ran blood, great CÃ¦sar fell.[3327]
    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
    Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,                        190
    Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
    O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
    The dint of pity: these are gracious drops.
    Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold[3329]
    Our CÃ¦sar's vesture wounded? Look you here,                      195
    Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.[3330]

    _First Cit._ O piteous spectacle![3331]

    _Sec. Cit._ O noble CÃ¦sar![3331]

    _Third Cit._ O woful day![3331]

    _Fourth Cit._ O traitors, villains![3331]                        200

    _First Cit._ O most bloody sight![3331]

    _Sec. Cit._ We will be revenged.[3331][3332]

    _All._ Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill! Slay![3331][3333]
    Let not a traitor live![3331][3333]

    _Ant._ Stay, countrymen.[3331][3334]                             205

    _First Cit._ Peace there! hear the noble Antony.[3335]

    _Sec. Cit._ We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die
    with him.

    _Ant._ Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    To such a sudden flood of mutiny.                                210
    They that have done this deed are honourable;
    What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
    That made them do it: they are wise and honourable,[3336]
    And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.[3337]
    I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts:                  215
    I am no orator, as Brutus is;
    But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    That love my friend; and that they know full well
    That gave me public leave to speak of him:[3338]
    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,[3339]              220
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    To stir men's blood: I only speak right on;
    I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
    Show you sweet CÃ¦sar's wounds, poor poor dumb mouths,
    And bid them speak for me: but were I Brutus,                    225
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
    Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
    In every wound of CÃ¦sar, that should move
    The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

    _All._ We'll mutiny.[3340]                                       230

    _First Cit._ We'll burn the house of Brutus.[3340]

    _Third Cit._ Away, then! come, seek the conspirators.

    _Ant._ Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.

    _All._ Peace, ho! Hear Antony. Most noble Antony!

    _Ant._ Why, friends, you go to do you know not what:             235
    Wherein hath CÃ¦sar thus deserved your loves?
    Alas, you know not; I must tell you then:
    You have forgot the will I told you of.

    _All._ Most true: the will! Let's stay and hear the will.

    _Ant._ Here is the will, and under CÃ¦sar's seal.                 240
    To every Roman citizen he gives,
    To every several man, seventy five drachmas.

    _Sec. Cit._ Most noble CÃ¦sar! we'll revenge his death.

    _Third Cit._ O royal CÃ¦sar!

    _Ant._ Hear me with patience.                                    245

    _All._ Peace, ho!

    _Ant._ Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
    His private arbours and new-planted orchards,
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,[3341]
    And to your heirs for ever; common pleasures,                    250
    To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
    Here was a CÃ¦sar! when comes such another?

    _First Cit._ Never, never. Come, away, away![3342]
    We'll burn his body in the holy place,
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.[3343]             255
    Take up the body.

    _Sec. Cit._ Go fetch fire.

    _Third Cit._ Pluck down benches.[3344]

    _Fourth Cit._ Pluck down forms, windows, any thing.[3344]

                                 [_Exeunt Citizens with the body._[3345]

    _Ant._ Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,[3346]          260
    Take thou what course thou wilt.[3347][3348]

                        _Enter a_ Servant.[3349]

                                     How now, fellow![3348]

    _Serv._ Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.[3350]

    _Ant._ Where is he?

    _Serv._ He and Lepidus are at CÃ¦sar's house.[3351]

    _Ant._ And thither will I straight to visit him:                 265
    He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
    And in this mood will give us any thing.

    _Serv._ I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius[3352]
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.

    _Ant._ Belike they had some notice of the people,                270
    How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.[3353]       [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A street._[3354]

                    _Enter_ CINNA _the poet_.[3355]

    _Cin._ I dreamt to-night that I did feast with CÃ¦sar,
    And things unlucky charge my fantasy:[3356]
    I have no will to wander forth of doors,
    Yet something leads me forth.

                        _Enter_ Citizens.[3357]

    _First Cit._ What is your name?                                    5

    _Sec. Cit._ Whither are you going?[3358]

    _Third Cit._ Where do you dwell?[3359]

    _Fourth Cit._ Are you a married man or a bachelor?

    _Sec. Cit._ Answer every man directly.

    _First Cit._ Ay, and briefly.                                     10

    _Fourth Cit._ Ay, and wisely.

    _Third Cit._ Ay, and truly, you were best.

    _Cin._ What is my name? Whither am I going? Where[3358]
    do I dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to
    answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly:          15
    wisely I say, I am a bachelor.[3360]

    _Sec. Cit._ That's as much as to say, they are fools that
    marry: you'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed;[3361]
    directly.[3361]

    _Cin._ Directly, I am going to CÃ¦sar's funeral.                   20

    _First Cit._ As a friend or an enemy?

    _Cin._ As a friend.

    _Sec. Cit._ That matter is answered directly.

    _Fourth Cit._ For your dwelling, briefly.

    _Cin._ Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.                           25

    _Third Cit._ Your name, sir, truly.

    _Cin._ Truly, my name is Cinna.

    _First Cit._ Tear him to pieces; he's a conspirator.

    _Cin._ I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.

    _Fourth Cit._ Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his       30
    bad verses.

    _Cin._ I am not Cinna the conspirator.[3362]

    _Fourth Cit._ It is no matter, his name's Cinna; pluck but[3363]
    his name out of his heart, and turn him going.

    _Third Cit._ Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho!
        firebrands:[3364]                                             35
    to Brutus', to Cassius'; burn all: some to Decius'[3364][3365]
    house, and some to Casca's; some to Ligarius': away, go![3364][3366]

                                                        [_Exeunt._[3367]

FOOTNOTES:

[3170] ACT III. SCENE I.] Rowe. Actus Tertius. Ff.]

Rome. Before....] Capell, substantially. The Capitol. Rowe. The Street
before the Capitol; and the Capitol open. Theobald. The Street leading
to the Capitol. Jennens.

[3171] A crowd of people ... Popilius, Publius, and others.] Malone,
after Capell. Flourish. Enter CÃ¦sar ... Artemidorus, Popilius, and the
Soothsayer. Ff (Artimedorus, Publius, F1).

and the Soothsayer.] om. Rowe (ed. 1). and the Soothsayers. Rowe (ed.
2).

[3172] _schedule_] F3 F4. _scedule_ F1 F2.

[3173] _nearer_] _near_ Anon. conj.

_great_] om. Pope.

[3174] _What ... ourself_] _That touches us? Ourself_ Craik (Collier
MS.).

[3175] CÃ¦sar....] Steevens, substantially. Artemidorus is push'd back.
CÃ¦sar, and the rest, enter the Senate: The Senate rises. Popilius
presses forward to speak to CÃ¦sar; and passing Cassius, says, Capell.
Omitted in Ff. Exeunt. Scene II. The Capitol.... Jennens.

[3176] [Aside to Cas. Jennens.

[3177] [Advances to CÃ¦sar.] Leaves him, and joins CÃ¦sar. Capell. om.
Ff. Follows CÃ¦sar. Jennens.

[3178] _What ... hand._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[3179] _him_] _him well_ Steevens conj.

[3180] _Casca ... prevention._] As in Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).
One line in Ff.

[3181] _done? If ... known_,] Ff. _done, if ... known?_ Theobald.

[3182] _or_] _on_ Malone conj.

[3183] [CÃ¦sar being arrived at his seat, Popilius whispers him and
smiles. Jennens.

[3184] _Lena_] om. Anon. conj.

_purposes_] _purpose_ Theobald.

[3185] [Exeunt Antony....] Exeunt Antony and Trebonius, conversing.
CÃ¦sar takes his Seat; the Senate theirs: and Metellus advances towards
CÃ¦sar. Capell. om. Ff.

[3186] _rears your_] _rear your_ Capell. _rears his_ Tyrwhitt conj.

[3187] _Are ... ready?_] Given to Cinna, Ritson conj.; to Casca, by
Dyce (Collier MS.).

_we_] _you_ Hanmer (ed. 2).

[3188] _heart:--_] Capell. _heart._ Ff.

[Kneeling.] Rowe. om. Ff. Prostrating himself. Capell.

[3189] _couchings_] _crouchings_ Hanmer.

_courtesies_] F1 F2. _curtesies_ F3. _Curtsies_ F4.

[3190] _fire_] _stir_ Warburton.

[3191] _first_] _fix'd_ Craik conj.

[3192] _law_] Malone (Johnson conj.). _lane_ Ff. _line_ Steevens conj.
_play_ Mason conj. _bane_ Becket conj. _vane_ Bailey conj.

[3193] _Low-crooked_] _Low, crooked_ Becket conj. _low-crouched_ Craik
(Collier MS.).

_spaniel-fawning_] Hyphen inserted by Johnson.

[3194] _wrong, nor_] _wrong, but with just cause; Nor_ Tyrwhitt conj.
(from Ben Jonson's quotation in his 'Sylva'). See note (IV).

[3195] _low_] _love_ F2.

[3196] _Of whose ... he_,] Put in the margin by Pope.

[3197] _true-fix'd_] _true-fixt_ Capell. _true fixt_ Ff. _true, fixt_
Rowe.

[3198] _rank_] _race_ Johnson conj.

[3199] _motion_] _notion_ Upton conj.

[3200] Cin.] Cim. Rowe.

[3201] _CÃ¦sar,--_] _CÃ¦sar--_ Rowe. _CÃ¦sar._ Ff.

[3202] _Doth ... kneel?_] _Doth ... kneele?_ F1. _Do ... kneel?_ F2 F3
F4 (_kneele_ F2). _Do ... kneel._ Rowe.

[3203] _Speak, hands_] Capell. _Speak hands_ Ff.

[Casca....] Edd. (Globe ed.). They stab CÃ¦sar. Ff. stabbing him in
the Neck. CÃ¦sar rises, catches at the Dagger, and struggles with
him: defends himself, for a time, against him, and against the other
Conspirators; but, stab'd by Brutus, Capell (from Plutarch).

[3204] [Dies.] Dyes. F1. om. F2 F3 F4. he submits; muffles up his Face
in his Mantle; falls, and dies. Senate in Confusion. Capell.

[3205] _friend_] _friends_ Pope (ed. 2).

[3206] [Exeunt all but Conspirators. Capell.

[3207] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter.... Ff.

[3208] SCENE II. Pope.

_Where is_] _Where's_ Pope.

[3209] _will_] _well_ Staunton conj.

[3210] Cas.] Pope. Cask. Ff.

[3211] _Stoop ... liberty!_] Given to Casca by Pope.

[3212] [Dipping their swords in CÃ¦sar's blood. Rowe.

[3213] _over_] _o'er_ Pope.

[3214] _states_] _state_ F1.

[3215] Bru.] Casc. Pope.

[3216] _lies_] F3 F4. _lyes_ F2. _lye_ F1.

[3217] Cas.] Bru. Pope.

_So oft_] om. Seymour conj.

_shall be_] om. Steevens conj.

[3218] _their_] _our_ Steevens (1793).

[3219] _What_] _What, what_ Rowe.

_Ay, every man away_:] _Ay, every man: Away!_ Capell conj.

[3220] _boldest and best_] _bold, and the best_ Rowe.

[3221] Enter....] Ff. Transferred by Dyce to follow _here?_ line 123.

[3222] _A friend of Antony's._] Given to the Servant by Pope.

[3223] [Kneeling. Rowe.

[3224] _bade_] Johnson. _bad_ Ff.

[3225] _bold, royal_] _royal, bold_ Pope.

[3226] _my master_] _Mark_ Seymour conj.

[3227] _I ... worse_] om. Seymour conj.

[3228] [Exit.] Exit Servant. Ff.

[3229] _have I_] _I have_ Pope (ed. 2).

[3230] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter.... Ff. Transferred by Dyce to
follow _comes Antony_, line 148.

[3231] SCENE III. Pope.

_But ... Mark Antony._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[3232] [Kneeling over the body. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3233] _death's hour_] _death hour_ Collier (one volume ed.).

[3234] _you_] _ye_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3235] _mean_] _means_ Pope.

[3236] _CÃ¦sar. For ... Antony_] _CÃ¦sar; but for you, Mark Antony, our
swords have leaden points_ Seymour conj.

[3237] _in strength of malice_,] _exempt from malice,_ Pope. _no
strength of malice;_ Capell. _reproof of malice_, Seymour conj.
_instrain'd of malice_, Becket conj. _in strength of welcome_, Craik
(Collier MS.). _in strength of amity_, Singer conj. _unstring their
malice_, Badham conj. _unfraught of malice_, Anon. conj. _forspent of
malice_, Anon. conj.

[3238] _in_] _in them_ Keightley.

[3239] _struck_] Steevens (1778). _strooke_ F1 F2. _strook_ F3 F4.

[3240] _Have thus proceeded_] _Proceeded thus_ Pope.

_wisdom_] F3 F4. _Wisedome_ F1 F2. _wisdoms_ Anon. conj.

[3241] [Taking them one after other. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3242] _all,--_] Rowe. _all_: F1 F2 F3. _all_, F4.

[3243] [Turning to the body, and bending over it. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3244] _foes, ... corse?_] Pointed as in Rowe. _foes?... coarse_, Ff.

[3245] _hart_] F1. _heart_ F2 F3 F4.

[3246] _lethe_] _Lethe_ F2 F3. _Lethe_ (in italics) F4. _Lethee_ F1.
_death_ Pope.

[3247] _O world ... lie!_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[3248] _heart_] Theobald. _hart_ Ff.

[3249] _strucken_] Steevens (1778). _stroken_ F1. _stricken_ F2 F3 F4.
_strooken_ Capell.

[3250] _Antony,--_] _Antony--_ Rowe. _Antony._ Ff.

_Caius Cassius_] om. Seymour conj., reading _Dost ... me_ as one line.

[3251] _were this_] _this were_ Pope (ed. 2).

[3252] _you, Antony_,] Theobald. _you Antony,_ F1 F2. _you Antony_ F3
F4.

[3253] _with you_] om. Steevens conj.

[3254] [Aside to Bru.] Aside. Rowe. om. Ff.

[3255] _pardon_:] Ff. _pardon_, Rowe.

[3256] _true_] _due_ Pope.

[3257] _fall ... not_] _follow: I not like it_ Seymour conj.

[3258] _you_] _your_ Pope.

[3259] _Else shall you not_] _You shall not else_ Pope.

[3260] [Exeunt ...] Capell. Exeunt. Manet Antony. Ff.

[3261] SCENE IV. Pope. _bleeding piece of_] _piece of bleeding_
Variorum (1803, 1813, 1821).

[3262] _hand_] _hands_ Grant White (Becket conj.). _land_ Becket conj.

[3263] _the limbs_] F3 F4. _the limbes_ F1 F2. _the kind_ Hanmer. _the
line_ Warburton. _the lives_ or _these lymmes_ Johnson conj. _these
imps_ Jackson conj. _the loins_ Craik (Collier MS.). _the tombs_
Staunton conj. _the sons_ Grant White conj. _the minds_ Dyce, ed. 2
(Jervis conj.). _the times_ S. Walker conj.

[3264] _quarter'd_] Pope. _quartered_ Ff.

_with_] _by_ Pope.

[3265] _Havoc_] _Ha! vous_ Anon. conj. ap. Gent. Mag. Vol. LX. p. 307.

[3266] _With_] _Of_ Long MS.

Enter a Servant.] Enter Octavio's Servant Ff.

[3267] _for him_] _to him_ Capell.

_to Rome_] F1 F3 F4. _Rome_ F2.

[3268] [Seeing the body.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3269] _catching, for_] F2 F3 F4. _catching from_ F1.

[3270] _beads_] _beds_ Pope.

[3271] _Began_] _Begin_ Hanmer.

[3272] _Post ... chanced_:] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3273] _Rome_] _room_ Upton conj.

[3274] _corse_] Pope. _course_ F1 F2. _coarse_ F3 F4.

[3275] [Exeunt ... body.] Rowe. Exeunt. Ff.

[3276] SCENE II.] Rowe. SCENE V. Pope. SCENE III. Jennens.

The Forum.] Rowe.

[3277] Enter ... Citizens.] Malone (after Capell). Enter Brutus and
goes into the Pulpit, and Cassius, with the Plebeians. Ff.

[3278] Citizens.] Capell. Ple. Ff (and throughout the scene).

[3279] _me speak_] _my speak_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_'em_] _them_ Capell.

[3280] _rendered_] Pope. _rendred_ Ff.

[3281] [Exit ... pulpit.] Edd. (Globe ed.). Exit ... rostrum. Capell.
Exeunt Cassius, with some of the Plebeians. Rowe. Exit ... Plebeians.
Theobald. Omitted in Ff.

[3282] _lovers_] _friends_ Pope.

[3283] _to him_] F1. _to them_ F2 F3 F4.

_Brutus'_] Capell. _Brutus_ Ff. _Brutus's_ Pope.

[3284] _free-men_] Ff. _free men_ Johnson.

[3285] _There is_] _There are_ Pope.

[3286] _Who ... offended._] As six lines of verse in Johnson.

[3287] _Who is_] _Who's_ Pope.

[3288] _reply._] Ff. _reply--_ Rowe.

[3289] All.] Ff. Cit. Capell. Cit. [several speaking at once. Malone.

[3290] Enter Antony and others, ... body.] Malone. Enter Antony, and
certain of his House, bearing CÃ¦sar's body. Capell. Enter Mark Antony,
with CÃ¦sars body. Ff.

[3291] _the benefit ... commonwealth_] _place in the commonwealth, and
the benefit of his dying_ Seymour conj.

[3292] [comes down. Capell.

[3293] _live, live!_] _live!_ Pope.

[3294] All.] Ff. Cit. Capell.

[3295] _Shall_] _Shall now_ Pope. _Shall all_ or _Shall well_
Staunton conj. om. Anon. conj.

_Shall ... Brutus._] Mitford would add _Live! live! Brutus, live!_

_crown'd_] Ff. _crowned_ Steevens.

[3296] _We'll ... clamours._] One line in Capell. Two, the first ending
_house_, in Ff.

[3297] _countrymen,--_] _countrymen--_ F4. _country-men._ F1 F2 F3.

[3298] _glories_] _glory_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.).

[3299] SCENE VI. Pope.

[3300] _beholding_] F1 F2 F3. _beholden_ F4.

[3301] [Goes ... pulpit.] Edd. Goes up. Capell. om. Ff.

[3302] _Brutus'_] Pope. _Brutus_ F1 F2 F3. _Brutus's_ F4.

[3303] _He says_] om. Steevens conj.

[3304] _he_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[3305] _blest_] F1. _glad_ F2 F3 F4. _most blest_ Capell.

[3306] _Romans,--_] _Romans--_ F4. _Romans._ F1 F2 F3.

[3307] _their bones_] _the bones_ F4.

[3308] _The noble_] _Noble_ Pope.

[3309] _on_] _at_ Pope.

[3310] _art_] F2 F3 F4. _are_ F1.

[3311] Sec. Cit.] 2. F1. Omitted in F2 F3 F4.

[3312] See note (IV).

_Has he_] _Ha! has he_ Anon. conj.

_masters_] _my masters_ Capell. _not, masters_ Craik.

[3313] _Has ... place._] Divided as in Capell. One line in Ff. Prose in
Pope (ed. 2).

[3314] _again_] om. Theobald (ed. 2).

[3315] _Yea_] _Nay_ Capell.

[3316] _It will_] _I will_ Capell.

[3317] Fourth Cit.] 4. Ff. All. Anon. conj.

_Read_] _Read us_ Anon. conj.

[3318] _Read ... will._] As in Ff. Prose in Craik.

_we'll_] _we will_ Theobald.

[3319] _CÃ¦sar's_] r_ead CÃ¦sar's_ Keightley (Capell conj.).

[3320] _They ... murderers_:] As two lines of verse, Capell MS.

[3321] _will?_] Pope. _will_: F1. _will_; F2 F3 F4.

[3322] All] Ff. First Cit. Edd. conj.

[3323] He ... pulpit.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3324] _Cassius'_] Pope. _Cassius_ F1 F2 F3. _Cassius's_ F4.

[3325] _This was the most_] _This, this, was the_ Pope.

[3326] _traitors'_] Warburton. _traitors_ Ff.

[3327] _Even ... statua, Which ... fell._] These lines are transposed
by Warburton.

_statua, Which ... blood_] _statue, which All ... with blood_ Hanmer.

[3328] _statua_] Steevens, 1793 (Malone conj.). _statue_ Ff. _statuÃ«_
Keightley.

[3329] _what weep_] Ff. _what, weep_ Pope.

[3330] _with_] _by_ Pope.

[3331] _O piteous ... countrymen_] Marked as five lines of verse in
Capell MS.

[3332] _We will_] _We'll_ Capell.

[3333] All. _Revenge!... live!_] See note (V).

[3334] [They are rushing out. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3335] _Peace_] _Peace, peace_ Capell conj.

[3336] _do it: they are_] _do't: they're_ S. Walker conj.

[3337] _reasons_] _reason_ Warburton.

[3338] _gave_] F1. _give_ F2 F3 F4.

[3339] _wit_] F2 F3 F4. _writ_ F1.

[3340] All ... First Cit.] All ... 1. Ff. First Cit.... Sec. Cit. Edd.
conj.

[3341] _this_] _that_ Theobald.

[3342] _Come, away, away!_] _Come, come, away:_ Capell. _Come, away,
away, away!_ Keightley. _Come, come, away, away!_ Anon. conj.

[3343] _brands_] _brands' ends_ Anon. conj.

_fire the_] F1. _fire all the_ F2 F3 F4. _then fire the_ Seymour conj.

[3344] _benches ... windows_] _the benches ... the windows_ Capell,
reading _Take ... thing_ as two lines, the first ending _down._

[3345] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt Plebeians with the Body. Rowe. Exit
Plebeians. F1. Exeunt Plebeians. F2 F3 F4.

[3346] Ant.] om. Theobald (ed. 2). _afoot_,] _afoot_; Hanmer.

[3347] _Take ... fellow!_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_Take thou_] _Take now_ Craik conj. _Take then_ Anon. conj.

[3348] _Take ... Sir_,] Marked as one line in Capell MS.

[3349] a Servant.] Rowe (ed. 2). Servant. Ff.

[3350] _Sir_,] om. Pope. As a separate line, Anon. conj.

[3351] _He_] _He, sir_, Capell conj. _Sir, he_ or _Both he_ Anon. conj.

_Lepidus_] _Lord Lepidus_ S. Walker conj.

[3352] _him_] _them_ Capell.

[3353] _Octavius_] _Octavus_ F1.

[3354] SCENE III.] Capell. Rowe continues the scene. SCENE VII. Pope.
SCENE IV. Jennens.

A street.] Capell.

[3355] Enter Cinna the Poet.] Capell. Enter Cinna the Poet, and after
him the Plebeians. Ff.

[3356] _unlucky_] Warburton. _unluckily_ Ff. _unlikely_ Collier
(Collier MS.).

[3357] Enter Citizens.] Capell. om. Ff.

[3358] _Whither_] F3 F4. _Whether_ F1 F2.

[3359] _dwell_] _live_ Capell.

[3360] _wisely I_] _wisely, I_ Craik.

[3361] _Proceed; directly_] _Proceed. Directly._ Johnson. _Proceede
directly._ F1 F2. _Proceed directly._ F3 F4.

[3362] Cin. _I am ... conspirator._] Omitted in Reed (1803, 1813, 1821).

[3363] _but_] _out_ Johnson.

[3364] _Tear ... go!_] Prose in Ff. Three lines of verse by Rowe,
ending _firebrands: ... house ... go._ Capell prints _Tear ...
firebrands_ only as verse.

[3365] _Brutus'_] Capell. _Brutus_ Ff.

_Cassius'_] Capell. _Cassius_ Ff.

_Decius'_] Capell. _Decius_ F1 F2 F3. _Decius's_ F4. _Decimus's_ Hanmer.

[3366] _house_] F1. _houses_ F2 F3 F4.

_Ligarius'_] Capell. _Ligarius_ Ff.

[3367] [Exeunt.] Exeunt all the Plebeians. Ff. Exeunt, forcing out
Cinna. Collier (ed. 2).




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _A house in Rome._[3368]

      ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, _and_ LEPIDUS, _seated at a table_.[3369]

    _Ant._ These many then shall die; their names are prick'd.[3370]

    _Oct._ Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?

    _Lep._ I do consent--[3371]

    _Oct._                Prick him down, Antony.

    _Lep._ Upon condition Publius shall not live,[3372]
    Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.[3373]                       5

    _Ant._ He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.[3374]
    But, Lepidus, go you to CÃ¦sar's house;
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine[3375]
    How to cut off some charge in legacies.

    _Lep._ What, shall I find you here?                               10

    _Oct._ Or here, or at the Capitol.                  [_Exit Lepidus._

    _Ant._ This is a slight unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands: is it fit,
    The three-fold world divided, he should stand
    One of the three to share it?

    _Oct._                        So you thought him,                 15
    And took his voice who should be prick'd to die
    In our black sentence and proscription.

    _Ant._ Octavius, I have seen more days than you:
    And though we lay these honours on this man,
    To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,                     20
    He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    To groan and sweat under the business,
    Either led or driven, as we point the way;[3376]
    And having brought our treasure where we will,
    Then take we down his load and turn him off,                      25
    Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    And graze in commons.[3377]

    _Oct._                You may do your will:
    But he's a tried and valiant soldier.

    _Ant._ So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
    I do appoint him store of provender:                              30
    It is a creature that I teach to fight,
    To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.[3378]
    And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so;
    He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;                 35
    A barren-spirited fellow; one that feeds[3379]
    On abjects, orts and imitations,[3380]
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,[3381]
    Begin his fashion: do not talk of him
    But as a property. And now, Octavius,                             40
    Listen great things: Brutus and Cassius
    Are levying powers: we must straight make head:
    Therefore let our alliance be combined,
    Our best friends made, our means stretch'd;[3382]
    And let us presently go sit in council,                           45
    How covert matters may be best disclosed,
    And open perils surest answered.

    _Oct._ Let us do so: for we are at the stake,
    And bay'd about with many enemies;[3383]
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,                 50
    Millions of mischiefs.[3384]            [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Camp near Sardis. Before Brutus's tent._[3385]

   _Drum. Enter_ BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, LUCIUS, _and_ Soldiers; TITINIUS
                   _and_ PINDARUS _meet them_.[3386]

    _Bru._ Stand, ho![3387]

    _Lucil._ Give the word, ho! and stand.[3388]

    _Bru._ What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near?[3388]

    _Lucil._ He is at hand; and Pindarus is come
    To do you salutation from his master.[3389]                        5

    _Bru._ He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
    In his own change, or by ill officers,[3390]
    Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    Things done undone: but if he be at hand,
    I shall be satisfied.

    _Pin._                I do not doubt                              10
    But that my noble master will appear
    Such as he is, full of regard and honour.

    _Bru._ He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,[3391][3392][3393]
    How he received you: let me be resolved.[3392][3393]

    _Lucil._ With courtesy and with respect enough;[3392]             15
    But not with such familiar instances,[3392]
    Nor with such free and friendly conference,[3392]
    As he hath used of old.[3392]

    _Bru._                  Thou hast described[3392]
    A hot friend cooling: ever note, Lucilius,[3392]
    When love begins to sicken and decay,[3392]                       20
    It useth an enforced ceremony.[3392]
    There are no tricks in plain and simple faith:[3392]
    But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,[3392]
    Make gallant show and promise of their mettle,[3392]
    But when they should endure the bloody spur,[3392]                25
    They fall their crests and like deceitful jades[3392][3394]
    Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?[3392][3395]

    _Lucil._ They mean this night in Sardis to be quarter'd;[3392]
    The greater part, the horse in general,[3392]
    Are come with Cassius.[3392]       [_Low march within._

    _Bru._                 Hark! he is arrived:[3392][3396]           30
    March gently on to meet him.[3397]

                _Enter_ CASSIUS _and his powers_.[3398]

    _Cas._ Stand, ho![3399]

    _Bru._ Stand, ho! Speak the word along.[3400]

    _First Sol._ Stand![3401]

    _Sec. Sol._ Stand![3402]                                          35

    _Third Sol._ Stand![3403]

    _Cas._ Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.

    _Bru._ Judge me, you gods! wrong I mine enemies?
    And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?[3404]

    _Cas._ Brutus this sober form of yours hides wrongs;              40
    And when you do them--

    _Bru._                 Cassius, be content;
    Speak your griefs softly: I do know you well.
    Before the eyes of both our armies here,
    Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
    Let us not wrangle: bid them move away;                           45
    Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    And I will give you audience.

    _Cas._                        Pindarus,
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off
    A little from this ground.[3405]

    _Bru._ Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man[3405][3406]      50
    Come to our tent till we have done our conference.[3405]
    Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.[3407]      [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Brutus's tent._[3408]

                  _Enter_ BRUTUS _and_ CASSIUS.[3409]

    _Cas._ That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
    Wherein my letters, praying on his side,[3410][3411]
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.[3411][3412]             5

    _Bru._ You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.[3413]

    _Cas._ In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offence should bear his comment.[3414]

    _Bru._ Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself[3415]
    Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,                       10
    To sell and mart your offices for gold
    To undeservers.

    _Cas._          I an itching palm![3416]
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,[3417]
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.

    _Bru._ The name of Cassius honours this corruption,               15
    And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.[3418]

    _Cas._ Chastisement!

    _Bru._ Remember March, the ides of March remember:
    Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?[3419]
    What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,                     20
    And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    But for supporting robbers, shall we now
    Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
    And sell the mighty space of our large honours                    25
    For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,[3420]
    Than such a Roman.[3421]

    _Cas._             Brutus, bait not me;
    I'll not endure it: you forget yourself,
    To hedge me in; I am a soldier, I,[3422]                          30
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.[3423]

    _Bru._              Go to; you are not, Cassius.

    _Cas._ I am.

    _Bru._ I say you are not.[3424]

    _Cas._ Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;                    35
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.[3425]

    _Bru._ Away, slight man!

    _Cas._ Is't possible?

    _Bru._                     Hear me, for I will speak.
    Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?                         40

    _Cas._ O ye gods, ye gods! must I endure all this?[3426]

    _Bru._ All this! ay, more: fret till your proud heart break;
    Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?[3427]
    Must I observe you? must I stand and crouch                       45
    Under your testy humour? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,[3428]
    I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    When you are waspish.

    _Cas._                Is it come to this?                         50

    _Bru._ You say you are a better soldier:
    Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
    And it shall please me well: for mine own part,
    I shall be glad to learn of noble men.[3429]

    _Cas._ You wrong me every way; you wrong me, Brutus;[3430]        55
    I said, an elder soldier, not a better:[3431]
    Did I say, better?[3432]

    _Bru._             If you did, I care not.

    _Cas._ When CÃ¦sar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.

    _Bru._ Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.

    _Cas._ I durst not!                                               60

    _Bru._ No.

    _Cas._ What, durst not tempt him!

    _Bru._                            For your life you durst not.

    _Cas._ Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.

    _Bru._ You have done that you should be sorry for.                65
    There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
    For I am arm'd so strong in honesty
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    Which I respect not. I did send to you
    For certain sums of gold, which you denied me:                    70
    For I can raise no money by vile means:
    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
    And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    By any indirection. I did send[3433]                              75
    To you for gold to pay my legions,
    Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
    Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
    When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
    To lock such rascal counters from his friends,                    80
    Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,[3434]
    Dash him to pieces![3434]

    _Cas._              I denied you not.

    _Bru._ You did.

    _Cas._          I did not: he was but a fool
    That brought my answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart:[3435]
    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,[3436]              85
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

    _Bru._ I do not, till you practise them on me.[3437]

    _Cas._ You love me not.

    _Bru._                  I do not like your faults.

    _Cas._ A friendly eye could never see such faults.

    _Bru._ A flatterer's would not, though they do appear[3438]       90
    As huge as high Olympus.

    _Cas._ Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
    Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
    For Cassius is a-weary of the world;
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;                     95
    Check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    Set in a note-book, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep[3439]
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart                        100
    Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:[3440]
    If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth;[3441]
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
    Strike, as thou didst at CÃ¦sar; for I know,
    When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better          105
    Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.

    _Bru._                          Sheath your dagger:
    Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
    Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour.[3442]
    O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,[3443]
    That carries anger as the flint bears fire,                      110
    Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark[3444]
    And straight is cold again.

    _Cas._                      Hath Cassius lived
    To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
    When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?[3445]

    _Bru._ When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.                115

    _Cas._ Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

    _Bru._ And my heart too.[3446]

    _Cas._                   O Brutus!

    _Bru._                             What's the matter?

    _Cas._ Have not you love enough to bear with me,[3447]
    When that rash humour which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?

    _Bru._              Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,[3448]     120
    When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.

    _Poet._ [_Within_] Let me go in to see the generals;
    There is some grudge between 'em; 'tis not meet[3449][3450]
    They be alone.[3450][3451]

    _Lucil._ [_Within_] You shall not come to them.[3450][3452]      125

    _Poet._ [_Within_] Nothing but death shall stay me.[3450][3453]

  _Enter_ Poet, _followed by_ LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, _and_ LUCIUS.[3454]

    _Cas._ How now! what's the matter?[3450]

    _Poet._ For shame, you generals! what do you mean?[3450]
    Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;[3450]
    For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.[3450]             130

    _Cas._ Ha, ha! how vilely doth this cynic rhyme![3450][3455]

    _Bru._ Get you hence, sirrah; saucy fellow, hence![3450]

    _Cas._ Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.[3450]

    _Bru._ I'll know his humour when he knows his time:[3450]
    What should the wars do with these jigging fools?[3450][3456]    135
    Companion, hence![3450]

    _Cas._            Away, away, be gone!                 [_Exit Poet._

    _Bru._ Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders[3457]
    Prepare to lodge their companies to-night.

    _Cas._ And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.                  [_Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius._

    _Bru._       Lucius, a bowl of wine!      [_Exit Lucius._[3458]  140

    _Cas._ I did not think you could have been so angry.

    _Bru._ O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.

    _Cas._ Of your philosophy you make no use,
    If you give place to accidental evils.

    _Bru._ No man bears sorrow better: Portia is dead.[3459]         145

    _Cas._ Ha! Portia![3460]

    _Bru._ She is dead.

    _Cas._ How 'scaped I killing when I cross'd you so?
    O insupportable and touching loss!
    Upon what sickness?

    _Bru._              Impatient of my absence,[3461]               150
    And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
    Have made themselves so strong: for with her death
    That tidings came: with this she fell distract,
    And, her attendants absent, swallow'd fire.

    _Cas._ And died so?

    _Bru._             Even so.

    _Cas._                       O ye immortal gods![3462]           155

            _Re-enter_ LUCIUS, _with wine and taper_.[3463]

    _Bru._ Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
    In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.                   [_Drinks._

    _Cas._ My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
    Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
    I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.      [_Drinks._    [3464]  160

    _Bru._ Come in, Titinius!       [_Exit Lucius._[3465]

                  _Re-enter_ TITINIUS, _with_ MESSALA.

                               Welcome, good Messala.
    Now sit we close about this taper here,
    And call in question our necessities.

    _Cas._ Portia, art thou gone?

    _Bru._                         No more, I pray you.[3466]
    Messala, I have here received letters,[3467]                     165
    That young Octavius and Mark Antony
    Come down upon us with a mighty power,
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.[3468]

    _Mes._ Myself have letters of the selfsame tenour.[3469]

    _Bru._ With what addition?[3470]                                 170

    _Mes._ That by proscription and bills of outlawry[3471]
    Octavius, Antony and Lepidus,
    Have put to death an hundred senators.[3472]

    _Bru._ Therein our letters do not well agree;
    Mine speak of seventy senators that died                         175
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.

    _Cas._ Cicero one![3473][3474]

    _Mes._             Cicero is dead,[3474]
    And by that order of proscription.[3475]
    Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?

    _Bru._ No, Messala.                                              180

    _Mes._ Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?

    _Bru._ Nothing, Messala.

    _Mes._                   That, methinks, is strange.

    _Bru._ Why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?[3476]

    _Mes._ No, my lord.

    _Bru._ Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.                    185

    _Mes._ Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.

    _Bru._ Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala:
    With meditating that she must die once
    I have the patience to endure it now.                            190

    _Mes._ Even so great men great losses should endure.

    _Cas._ I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.

    _Bru._ Well, to our work alive. What do you think
    Of marching to Philippi presently?[3477]                         195

    _Cas._ I do not think it good.

    _Bru._                         Your reason?

    _Cas._                                      This it is:[3478]
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us:
    So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    Doing himself offence; whilst we lying still
    Are full of rest, defence and nimbleness.                        200

    _Bru._ Good reasons must of force give place to better.
    The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
    Do stand but in a forced affection,
    For they have grudged us contribution:
    The enemy, marching along by them,                               205
    By them shall make a fuller number up,
    Come on refresh'd, new-added and encouraged;[3479]
    From which advantage shall we cut him off[3480]
    If at Philippi we do face him there,[3481]
    These people at our back.

    _Cas._                    Hear me, good brother.[3482]           210

    _Bru._ Under your pardon. You must note beside
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
    The enemy increaseth every day;
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.                         215
    There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    Omitted, all the voyage of their life
    Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
    On such a full sea are we now afloat,                            220
    And we must take the current when it serves,
    Or lose our ventures.

    _Cas._                Then, with your will, go on;[3483][3484]
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.[3483][3485]

    _Bru._ The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    And nature must obey necessity;                                  225
    Which we will niggard with a little rest.
    There is no more to say?[3486]

    _Cas._                   No more. Good night:
    Early to-morrow will we rise and hence.

    _Bru._ Lucius! [_Re-enter Lucius._] My gown.
        [_Exit Lucius._] Farewell, good Messala:[3487]
    Good night, Titinius: noble, noble Cassius,                      230
    Good night, and good repose.

    _Cas._                       O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night:
    Never come such division 'tween our souls![3488]
    Let it not, Brutus.

    _Bru._              Every thing is well.

    _Cas._ Good night, my lord.

    _Bru._                      Good night, good brother.[3489]      235

    _Tit. Mes._ Good night, Lord Brutus.

    _Bru._                               Farewell, every one.

                                         [_Exeunt all but Brutus._[3490]

                  _Re-enter_ LUCIUS, _with the gown_.

    Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?

    _Luc._ Here in the tent.

    _Bru._                   What, thou speak'st drowsily?
    Poor knave, I blame thee not; thou art o'er-watch'd.[3491]
    Call Claudius and some other of my men;[3492]                    240
    I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.

    _Luc._ Varro and Claudius![3492][3493][3494]

                     _Enter_ VARRO _and_ CLAUDIUS.

    _Var._ Calls my lord?[3495]

    _Bru._ I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
    It may be I shall raise you by and by                            245
    On business to my brother Cassius.

    _Var._ So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.[3496]

    _Bru._ I will not have it so: lie down, good sirs;
    It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
    Look, Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;                   250
    I put it in the pocket of my gown. [_Var. and Clau. lie down._[3497]

    _Luc._ I was sure your lordship did not give it me.

    _Bru._ Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
    Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,[3498]
    And touch thy instrument a strain or two?[3498][3499]            255

    _Luc._ Ay, my lord, an't please you.[3500]

    _Bru._                                It does, my boy:[3501]
    I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.[3501]

    _Luc._ It is my duty, sir.[3501][3502]

    _Bru._ I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
    I know young bloods look for a time of rest.                     260

    _Luc._ I have slept, my lord, already.

    _Bru._ It was well done; and thou shalt sleep again;
    I will not hold thee long: if I do live,
    I will be good to thee.                   [_Music, and a song._[3503]
    This is a sleepy tune. O murderous slumber,[3504]                265
    Lay'st thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,[3505]
    That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night;
    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:
    If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.[3506]         270
    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down[3507]
    Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.      [_Sits down._[3508]

                   _Enter the Ghost of_ CÃSAR.[3509]

    How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    That shapes this monstrous apparition.                           275
    It comes upon me. Art thou any thing?
    Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
    That makest my blood cold, and my hair to stare?[3510]
    Speak to me what thou art.

    _Ghost._ Thy evil spirit, Brutus.

    _Bru._                            Why comest thou?[3511]         280

    _Ghost._ To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.

    _Bru._ Well; then I shall see thee again?[3512]

    _Ghost._ Ay, at Philippi.

    _Bru._ Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.   [_Exit Ghost._[3513]
    Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.[3514]                     285
    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.[3514]
    Boy, Lucius! Varro! Claudius! Sirs, awake![3492][3493]
    Claudius![3492]

    _Luc._ The strings, my lord, are false.

    _Bru._ He thinks he still is at his instrument.[3515]            290
    Lucius, awake!

    _Luc._ My lord?[3516]

    _Bru._ Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?[3517]

    _Luc._ My lord. I do not know that I did cry.

    _Bru._ Yes, that thou didst: didst thou see any thing?           295

    _Luc._ Nothing, my lord.

    _Bru._ Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius![3492][3518]

    [_To Var._] Fellow thou, awake![3519]

    _Var._ My lord?

    _Clau._ My lord?                                                 300

    _Bru._ Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?

    _Var. Clau._ Did we, my lord?[3520]

    _Bru._                        Ay: saw you any thing?

    _Var._ No, my lord, I saw nothing.

    _Clau._                            Nor I, my lord.

    _Bru._ Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
    Bid him set on his powers betimes before,                        305
    And we will follow.

    _Var. Clau._        It shall be done, my lord.[3520]      [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[3368] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Rowe. Actus Quartus. Ff.

A house in Rome.] See note (VI).

[3369] Antony ... table.] Malone. Enter Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus.
Ff.

[3370] _These many_] _These, marry_ Grey conj.

[3371] _consent--_] Knight. _consent_: Capell. _consent._ Ff.

[3372] _Publius_] _Lucius_ Upton conj.

[3373] _Who is your_] _You are his_ Upton conj.

[3374] _damn_] F4. _dam_ F1 F2 F3.

[3375] _shall_] _will_ Steevens (1793).

[3376] _Either_] Ff. _Or_ Pope.

_point_] F1. _print_ F2 F3 F4.

[3377] _in commons_] _in common_ Hanmer. _on commons_ Collier MS.

[3378] _motion govern'd_] Pope. _motion, govern'd_ Ff.

[3379] _barren-spirited_] Hyphened by Pope.

[3380] _abjects, orts_] Staunton. _abject orts_ Theobald. _Objects,
Arts_ Ff. _abject arts_ Becket conj.

_imitations_,] Rowe (ed. 2). _Imitations._ Ff.

[3381] _staled_] _stal'de_ F1 F2. _stal'd_ F3. _stall'd_ F4.

[3382] _made, our_] _made secure, our best_ Anon. conj.

_our means stretch'd_] _our meanes stretcht_ F1. _and our best meanes
stretcht out_ F2 F3 F4 (_means_ F4). _our best means stretcht_
Johnson. _our means stretch'd to the utmost_ Malone. _our choicest
means stretch'd out_ Staunton conj.

[3383] _bay'd_] Pope. _bayed_ Ff.

[3384] _mischiefs_] _mischief_ Steevens (1778).

[3385] SCENE II.] Rowe.

Camp ...] Before Brutus's Tent, in the Camp near Sardis. Rowe.

[3386] Enter Brutus, Lucilius ... Titinius ...] Enter Brutus, Lucius,
and soldiers; Lucilius, Titinius ... Nicholson conj.

Lucius] Capell. om. Ff.

Soldiers] Rowe. the Army Ff.

[3387] _Stand, ho!_] _Stand here_ Steevens (1793).

[3388] S. Walker would read _Give ... Lucilius,_ as one line.

[3389] [presenting Pindarus, who gives a Letter. Capell. Jennens
supposes that a speech of Pindarus is lost here.

[3390] _change_] _charge_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_officers_] _offices_ Johnson conj.

[3391] _He ... Lucilius_,] As in Ff. As two lines in Craik.

_A word_] _Hear, a word_ Hanmer. _A word with you_ Anon. conj.

[3392] _A word ... Cassius._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[3393] _Lucilius, ... you_:] F3 F4. _Lucilius ... you_: F1F2.
_Lucilius,-- ... you_, Rowe.

[3394] _crests_] F1. _crest_ F2 F3 F4.

[3395] _sink_] _Shrink_ Craik conj.

[3396] [Low ...] Pope. After line 24 in Ff. March within. Capell.

[3397] [March. Capell.

[3398] Enter ...] Ff (after _Cassius_, line 30). Enter Cassius and
Soldiers. Rowe. Enter Cassius, and Forces. Capell.

[3399] [to his Officers, entering. Capell.

[3400] _Stand, ho!_] _Stand:--_[to his.] Capell.

[3401] First Sol.] Edd. (Globe ed.). 1. O. Capell. om. Ff. Within.
Rowe. Without. Staunton.

[3402] Sec. Sol.] Edd. (Globe ed.). 2. O. Capell. om. Ff. Within. Rowe.
Without. Staunton.

[3403] Third Sol.] Edd. (Globe ed.). 3. O. Capell. om. Ff. Within.
Rowe. Without. Staunton.

[One after other, and fainter Collier MS.

[3404] _brother?_] F3 F4. _brother._ F1 F2.

[3405] S. Walker would end the lines _Lucilius, ... like ... we ...
conference._

[3406] _Lucilius_] _Lucius_ Craik. (See note VII).

_you_] om. Pope.

_let_] _see you let_ Mitford conj., ending line 49 at _Lucilius_.

_man_] _man, Lucilius_, Capell, reading _Do ... Lucilius_ as one line.

[3407] _Let Lucius_] _Lucilius_ Craik. See note (VII).

_our_] _the_ Rowe.

[3408] SCENE III.] Pope. Rowe continues the scene.

Brutus's tent.] Hanmer. The Inside of Brutus's tent. Theobald. Within
the Tent. Lucius, and Titinius at the Door. Capell.

[3409] Enter ...] Capell. Manet ... F1. Manent ... F2 F3 F4.
Re-enter ... Theobald.

[3410] _Wherein_] _Whereon_ Seymour conj.

[3411] _letters ... man, were_] Malone. _letters ... man was_ F1.
_letter ... man, was_ F2 F3 F4.

[3412] _off_] _of_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3413] _case_] _cause_ Capell conj.

[3414] _his_] Ff. _its_ Pope.

[3415] _Let_] _Yet let_ Pope. _And let_ Capell.

[3416] _I_] _Ay_, Rowe.

[3417] _speaks_] F4. _speakes_ F1 F2 F3. _speak_ Pope.

[3418] _doth_] _does_ Collier (ed. 1).

_his_] Ff. _its_ Pope.

[3419] _justice'_] Capell. _justice_ Ff.

[3420] _bay_] F1. _baite_ F2. _bait_ F3 F4.

[3421] _bait_] F3 F4. _baite_ F1 F2. _bay_ Theobald.

[3422] _soldier, I_] _soldier, ay_ Steevens, 1773 (Jennens conj.).

[3423] _to_] _too_ F1.

_not, Cassius_] Hamner. _not Cassius_ Ff.

[3424] _I say_] _Cassius, I say_ Steevens conj.

[3425] _farther_] Ff. _further_ Steevens.

[3426] _O ye gods_] _O gods_ Pope.

[3427] _budge_] F4. _bouge_ F1. _boudge_ F2 F3.

[3428] _Though_] _Thought_ F2.

[3429] _noble_] _abler_ Collier (Collier MS.). _able_ Singer conj.

[3430] _You ... Brutus_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_me every way; you_] _me; every way you_ Ritson conj.

[3431] _elder_] _older_ Collier (one volume edition).

[3432] _better_] _a better_ Knight (National ed.).

[3433] _indirection_] _indirectness_ Pope.

[3434] _thunderbolts, Dash_] _thunderbolts Dash_ Collier (one volume
ed.).

[3435] _That brought my_] Ff. _that brought My_ Dyce.

_back_] om. Steevens conj.

[3436] _his_] _a_ Rowe.

[3437] _not, till_] _not. Still_ Warburton.

_not, till ... me._] _not: will you practise that on me?_ Hanmer.

[3438] _do_] _did_ Collier MS.

[3439] _my_] _his_ Capell conj.

[3440] _Plutus'_] Pope. _Pluto's_ Ff.

[3441] _be'st a Roman_] _needst a Roman's_ Warburton.

[3442] _humour_] _honour_ Craik conj.

[3443] _lamb_] _man_ Pope. _temper_ Anon. conj.

[3444] _Who_] _Which_ Hanmer.

[3445] _blood ill-temper'd_] _blood, ill-temper'd_, Staunton.

[3446] [Embracing. Rowe.

[3447] _not you_] _you not_ Pope (ed. 2).

[3448] _forgetful_] _forgetfulls_ F2. _forget_ Seymour conj.

_from_] om. Capell.

[3449] Poet. [Within]. A noise within. Poet within. Theobald. Enter a
Poet. Poet. Ff. Enter Lucilius and Titinius, and a Poet. Poet. Rowe.
(Lucius, Rowe, ed. 2).

[3450] Poet ... _gone!_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[3451] _'em_] _them_ Capell.

[3452] Lucil. [Within]. Dyce. Lucil. F1. Luci. F2 F3 F4. Luc. Rowe.
Luc. within. Theobald.

[3453] Poet. [Within]. Theobald. Poet. Ff.

[3454] Enter ... Lucius.] Edd. (Globe ed.). Enter Poet, followed by
Lucilius and Titinius. Dyce. Enter Poet. Theobald. om. Ff.

[3455] _vilely_] F4. _vildely_ F1 F2. _vildly_ F3.

_doth_] _does_ Capell.

[3456] _jigging_] _jingling_ Pope.

[3457] SCENE IV. Pope.

[3458] [Exeunt ...] Rowe. om. Ff.

[Exit Lucius.] Capell.

[3459] _Portia is_] _Portia's_ Pope.

[3460] _Portia!_] _Portia? brother, said you?_ Seymour conj.

[3461] _Impatient_] _Impatience_ Capell conj.

[3462] _O ye_] om. Steevens conj.

[3463] Re-enter Lucius ... taper.] Edd. (Globe ed.). Enter Boy ...
Tapers. Ff. Re-enter Lucius ... Tapers. Capell.

[3464] _Brutus'_] Pope. _Brutus_ F1 F2 F3. _Brutus's_ F4.

[Drinks.] Capell. om. Ff.

[3465] SCENE V. Pope.

_Come in ... Messala_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[Exit Lucius.] Edd. (Globe ed.). om. Ff.

Re-enter ...] Dyce. Enter Titinius and ... Ff (after line 165).
Enter ... Theobald (after line 166). Re-enter ... Capell (after line 165).

[3466] _Portia_] _Oh Portia_ Pope. _Ah! Portia_ Seymour conj.

[3467] _here_] om. Pope (ed. 2).

[3468] _toward_] _towards_ Capell.

[3469] _tenour_] Theobald. _tenure_ Ff.

[3470] _addition?_] Rowe. _addition._ Ff.

[3471] _proscription_] _proscriptions_ Pope.

_and ... outlawry_] om. Seymour conj.

_outlawry_] F4. _outlarie_ F1. _outlary_ F2 F3.

[3472] _an_] _a_ Capell.

[3473] _Cicero_] _Cibero_ F2.

_Cicero ... dead_,] As two hemistichs, or as prose, Craik conj.

_Cicero_] _Ay, Cicero_ Capell. _Yes, Cicero_ Keightley.

[3474] _Cicero ... proscription_] Arranged as in Johnson. One line in
Ff.

[3475] _by that_] _that by_ Capell.

_proscription._] F3 F4. _proscription_ F1 F2.

[3476] _Why ... yours?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3477] _presently?_] Pope. _presently._ Ff.

[3478] _This it is_:] _This_: Steevens conj.

[3479] _new-added_] Capell. _new added_ Ff. _new aided_ Singer (ed. 2).
_new-hearted_ Craik (Collier MS.).

[3480] _shall we_] _we shall_ Craik conj.

_off_] Rowe. _off._ Ff.

[3481] _him there_,] Ff. _him, there_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[3482] _brother._] _brother--_ Rowe.

[3483] _Then ... Philippi_] Arranged as in Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _along_, in Ff.

[3484] _will_] _good will_ Seymour conj., omitting _go on_.

[3485] _We'll along_] _we will along_ Rowe. _We'll on_ Capell.

_We'll ... ourselves_] _We will along_ Seymour conj.

[3486] _say?_] Capell. _say._ Ff.

[3487] _Lucius!_ [Re-enter Lucius.] _My_] Edd. Enter Lucius. _Lucius
my_ Ff.

[Exit Lucius.] Hanmer. om. Ff.

_Farewell_] _now farewel_ Hanmer. _Fare you well_ or _Fare ye well_ S.
Walker conj.

[3488] _come_] _came_ Rowe (ed. 1).

[3489] Cas. _Good ... brother_] Omitted by Pope.

[3490] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt Cas. Tit. Mes. Capell. Exeunt. Ff.

Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter ... Ff (after _Brutus_, line 239). Re-enter
Hanmer (after _Brutus_, line 239).

[3491] _not_] F1. _art_ F2. om. F3 F4.

[3492] _Claudius_] Rowe. _Claudio_ Ff.

[3493] _Varro_] Rowe. _Varrus_ Ff. _Varus_ S. Walker conj. (withdrawn).

[3494] Enter ...] Rowe. Enter Varrus and Claudio. Ff.

[3495] SCENE VI. Pope.

_Calls_] _Did you call_, Seymour conj.

[3496] _So ... pleasure_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3497] [Var. and Clau ...] Servants retire, and sleep. Capell. Serv.
lie down. Malone. om. Ff.

[3498] _heavy ... two_] F1. _instrument a straine or two. And touch
thy heavy eyes a-while_ F2 F3 F4.

[3499] _two?_] Rowe. _two._ Ff.

[3500] _Ay_,] _Ay, good_ Seymour conj.

[3501] S. Walker would arrange thus: _It ... much, But ... sir._

[3502] _duty, sir_] _duty to my still kind lord_ Seymour conj.

[3503] [... song.] Ff.... song: toward the End, Lucius falls asleep.
Capell.

[3504] _slumber_] F3 F4. _slumbler_ F1 F2.

[3505] _Lay'st_ Rowe. _Layest_ Ff.

[3506] [lays the Instrument by, and sits down. Capell.

[3507] _Let me see, let me see_] _But let me see_ Pope.

_see_;] F1. _see?_ F2 F3 F4.

[3508] [Sits down.] He sits down to read. Rowe. om. Ff.

[3509] SCENE VII. Pope.

[3510] _stare_] _start_ or _stand_ Anon. conj.

[3511] _Brutus._] F3 F4. _Brutus?_ F1. _Brutuss_ F2.

[3512] _Well_] As in Ff. om. Pope. Put in a separate line by Steevens
(1793).

[3513] [Exit Ghost.] Rowe (after line 288). om. Ff. vanishes. Capell
(after line 288).

[3514] _vanishest. Ill spirit_,] _vanishest, Ill spirit_; Rowe.

[3515] _still is_] _is still_ F4.

[3516] [waking. Capell.

[3517] _Didst ... out?_] As in Pope. Prose in Ff.

_Lucius_] _Lucus_ F1.

[3518] _Sleep ... Fellow_] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[3519] [To Var.] Edd. (Globe ed.). om. Ff.

_Fellow thou_,] _fellow! Varro!_ Theobald (Warburton).

[3520] Var. Clau.] Capell. Both. Ff.




ACT V.


SCENE I. _The plains of Philippi._[3521]

              _Enter_ OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, _and their army_.

    _Oct._ Now, Antony, our hopes are answered:
    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions;
    It proves not so: their battles are at hand;
    They mean to warn us at Philippi here,[3522]                       5
    Answering before we do demand of them.

    _Ant._ Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
    Wherefore they do it: they could be content
    To visit other places; and come down[3523]
    With fearful bravery, thinking by this face[3523]                 10
    To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    But 'tis not so.

                          _Enter a_ Messenger.

    _Mess._          Prepare you, generals:
    The enemy comes on in gallant show;
    Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    And something to be done immediately.[3524]                       15

    _Ant._ Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    Upon the left hand of the even field.[3525]

    _Oct._ Upon the right hand I; keep thou the left.[3526]

    _Ant._ Why do you cross me in this exigent?[3527]

    _Oct._ I do not cross you; but I will do so.           [_March._  20

      _Drum. Enter_ BRUTUS, CASSIUS, _and their_ Army; LUCILIUS,
                 TITINIUS, MESSALA, _and others_.[3528]

    _Bru._ They stand, and would have parley.

    _Cas._ Stand fast, Titinius: we must out and talk.

    _Oct._ Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?

    _Ant._ No, CÃ¦sar, we will answer on their charge.
    Make forth; the generals would have some words.                   25

    _Oct._ Stir not until the signal.[3529]

    _Bru._ Words before blows: is it so, countrymen?

    _Oct._ Not that we love words better, as you do.

    _Bru._ Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.

    _Ant._ In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words:          30
    Witness the hole you made in CÃ¦sar's heart,
    Crying 'Long live! hail, CÃ¦sar!'

    _Cas._                           Antony,
    The posture of your blows are yet unknown;[3530]
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,[3531]
    And leave them honeyless.

    _Ant._                    Not stingless too.[3532]                35

    _Bru._ O, yes, and soundless too;[3533]
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,[3533]
    And very wisely threat before you sting.[3533]

    _Ant._ Villains, you did not so, when your vile daggers
    Hack'd one another in the sides of CÃ¦sar:[3534]                   40
    You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,[3535]
    And bow'd like bondmen, kissing CÃ¦sar's feet;
    Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind[3536]
    Struck CÃ¦sar on the neck. O you flatterers![3537][3538]

    _Cas._ Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself:[3538][3539]       45
    This tongue had not offended so to-day,
    If Cassius might have ruled.

    _Oct._ Come, come, the cause: if arguing make us sweat,[3540]
    The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    Look;[3541][3542]                                                 50
    I draw a sword against conspirators;[3542][3543]
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Never, till CÃ¦sar's three and thirty wounds[3544]
    Be well avenged, or till another CÃ¦sar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.[3545]              55

    _Bru._ CÃ¦sar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,[3546]
    Unless thou bring'st them with thee.

    _Oct._                               So I hope;
    I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.

    _Bru._ O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.[3547]            60

    _Cas._ A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honour,[3548]
    Join'd with a masker and a reveller!

    _Ant._ Old Cassius still!

    _Oct._                    Come, Antony; away!
    Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth;
    If you dare fight to-day, come to the field:                      65
    If not, when you have stomachs.

                       [_Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their army._[3549]

    _Cas._ Why, now, blow wind, swell billow and swim bark![3550]
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.[3551]

    _Bru._ Ho, Lucilius! hark, a word with you.

    _Lucil._                 [_Standing forth_] My lord?

                                  [_Brutus and Lucilius converse apart._

    _Cas._ Messala!

    _Mes._ [_Standing forth_] What says my general?[3552][3553]

    _Cas._                                Messala,[3553][3554][3555]  70
    This is my birth-day; as this very day[3555][3556]
    Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala:
    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set[3557]
    Upon one battle all our liberties.                                75
    You know that I held Epicurus strong,
    And his opinion: now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.
    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign[3558]
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,                   80
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands;
    Who to Philippi here consorted us:
    This morning are they fled away and gone;
    And in their steads do ravens, crows and kites[3559]
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,                       85
    As we were sickly prey: their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.[3560]

    _Mes._ Believe not so.

    _Cas._                 I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved                             90
    To meet all perils very constantly.[3561]

    _Bru._ Even so, Lucilius.[3562]

    _Cas._                    Now, most noble Brutus,
    The gods to-day stand friendly, that we may,
    Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,[3563]         95
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together:
    What are you then determined to do?

    _Bru._ Even by the rule of that philosophy                       100
    By which I did blame Cato for the death[3564]
    Which he did give himself: I know not how,[3565][3566]
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,[3566]
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent[3566]
    The time of life: arming myself with patience[3566][3567]        105
    To stay the providence of some high powers[3568]
    That govern us below.

    _Cas._                Then, if we lose this battle,[3569]
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?[3570]

    _Bru._ No, Cassius, no: think not, thou noble Roman,[3571]       110
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind. But this same day
    Must end that work the ides of March begun;[3572]
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    Therefore our everlasting farewell take.                         115
    For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
    If not, why then this parting was well made.

    _Cas._ For ever and for ever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;                         120
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.

    _Bru._ Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    The end of this day's business ere it come!
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! away!           [_Exeunt._  125


SCENE II. _The field of battle._[3573]

              _Alarum. Enter_ BRUTUS _and_ MESSALA.[3574]

    _Bru._ Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side:              [_Loud alarum._[3575]
    Let them set on at once; for I perceive
    But cold demeanour in Octavius' wing,[3576]
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.[3577]                    5
    Ride, ride, Messala: let them all come down.              [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _Another part of the field._[3578]

             _Alarums. Enter_ CASSIUS _and_ TITINIUS.[3579]

    _Cas._ O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy:
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.

    _Tit._ O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early;                  5
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.[3580]

                           _Enter_ PINDARUS.

    _Pin._ Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;[3581]
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord:                            10
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.[3582]

    _Cas._ This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius;
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?

    _Tit._ They are, my lord.

    _Cas._                    Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,                    15
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again; that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.[3583]

    _Tit._ I will be here again, even with a thought.           [_Exit._

    _Cas._ Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;[3584]               20
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.

                                     [_Pindarus ascends the hill._[3585]

    This day I breathed first: time is come round,[3586]
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?[3587]              25

    _Pin._ [_Above_] O my lord![3588]

    _Cas._ What news?

    _Pin._ [_Above_] Titinius is enclosed round about[3589][3590]
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;[3590]
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.[3590]                30
    Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.[3590][3591]
    He's ta'en. [_Shout._] And, hark! they shout for joy.[3590]

    _Cas._ Come down; behold no more.[3592]
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face![3593]                 35

                          _PINDARUS descends._

    Come hither, sirrah:[3594]
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner;[3594]
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;              40
    Now be a freeman; and with this good sword,[3595]
    That ran through CÃ¦sar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;[3596]
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [_Pindarus stabs him._] CÃ¦sar, thou art
        revenged,[3597]                                               45
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.       [_Dies._[3598]

    _Pin._ So, I am free; yet would not so have been,[3599]
    Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.      [_Exit._   [3600]  50

               _Re-enter_ TITINIUS _with_ MESSALA.[3601]

    _Mes._ It is but change, Titinius; for Octavius[3602]
    Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
    As Cassius' legions are by Antony.

    _Tit._ These tidings will well comfort Cassius.

    _Mes._ Where did you leave him?

    _Tit._                          All disconsolate,                 55
    With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.

    _Mes._ Is not that he that lies upon the ground?

    _Tit._ He lies not like the living. O my heart!

    _Mes._ Is not that he?

    _Tit._                 No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,                            60
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,[3603]
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,[3604]
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;[3605]
    Clouds, dews and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.                       65

    _Mes._ Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,[3606]
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,                             70
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!

    _Tit._ What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus?[3607]

    _Mes._ Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
    The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
    Into his ears: I may say 'thrusting' it,                          75
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.

    _Tit._                    Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.      [_Exit Messala._[3608]
    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?                      80
    Did I not meet thy friends? and did not they[3609]
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued every thing!
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;                    85
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
    And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
    By your leave, gods: this is a Roman's part:
    Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.                   90

                                                       [_Kills himself._

        _Alarum. Re-enter_ MESSALA, _with_ BRUTUS, _young_ CATO,
                          _and others_.[3610]

    _Bru._ Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?[3611]

    _Mes._ Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.

    _Bru._ Titinius' face is upward.

    _Cato._                          He is slain.

    _Bru._ O Julius CÃ¦sar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords[3612]               95
    In our own proper entrails.        [_Low alarums._[3613]

    _Cato._                     Brave Titinius![3614]
    Look, whether he have not crown'd dead Cassius!

    _Bru._ Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well![3615]
    It is impossible that ever Rome                                  100
    Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears[3616]
    To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
    I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body:[3617]
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,[3618]                     105
    Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato: let us to the field.
    Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on.[3619]
    'Tis three o'clock; and, Romans, yet ere night[3620]
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.              [_Exeunt._  110


SCENE IV. _Another part of the field._[3621]

   _Alarum. Enter, fighting_, Soldiers _of both armies; then_ BRUTUS,
              _young_ CATO, LUCILIUS, _and others_.[3622]

    _Bru._ Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!

    _Cato._ What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend;                         5
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho![3623]

    _Bru._ And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;[3624]
    Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus!      [_Exit._[3625]

    _Lucil_. O young and noble Cato, art thou down?[3626]
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,                       10
    And mayst be honour'd, being Cato's son.

    _First Sold._ Yield, or thou diest.[3627]

    _Lucil._                            Only I yield to die:[3626][3628]
    [_Offering money_] There is so much that thou wilt kill me
        straight;[3629]
    Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death.

    _First Sold._ We must not. A noble prisoner![3628][3630]          15

    _Sec. Sold._ Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.

    _First Sold._ I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.[3631]

                         _Enter_ ANTONY.[3632]

    Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.

    _Ant._ Where is he?[3633]

    _Lucil._ Safe, Antony; Brutus is safe enough:                     20
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus:
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,[3634]
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.                       25

    _Ant._ This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,[3635]
    A prize no less in worth: keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness: I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
    And see whether Brutus be alive or dead,[3636]                    30
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent[3637]
    How every thing is chanced.                               [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _Another part of the field._[3638]

      _Enter_ BRUTUS, DARDANIUS, CLITUS, STRATO, _and_ VOLUMNIUS.

    _Bru._ Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.

    _Cli._ Statilius show'd the torch-light, but, my lord,
    He came not back: he is or ta'en or slain.

    _Bru._ Sit thee down, Clitus: slaying is the word;
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.  [_Whispering._[3639]  5

    _Cli._ What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.

    _Bru._ Peace then, no words.

    _Cli._                        I'll rather kill myself.

    _Bru._ Hark thee, Dardanius.                          [_Whispering._

    _Dar._                        Shall I do such a deed?[3640]

    _Cli._ O Dardanius!

    _Dar._ O Clitus!                                                  10

    _Cli._ What ill request did Brutus make to thee?

    _Dar._ To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.

    _Cli._ Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    That it runs over even at his eyes.

    _Bru._ Come hither, good Volumnius; list a word.                  15

    _Vol._ What says my lord?

    _Bru._                     Why, this, Volumnius:
    The ghost of CÃ¦sar hath appear'd to me
    Two several times by night, at Sardis once,
    And this last night here in Philippi fields:
    I know my hour is come.

    _Vol._                  Not so, my lord.                          20

    _Bru._ Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit:      [_Low alarums._[3641]
    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,                     25
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together:
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,[3642]
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.[3643]

    _Vol._ That's not an office for a friend, my lord.

                                                        [_Alarum still._

    _Cli._ Fly, fly, my lord; there is no tarrying here.              30

    _Bru._ Farewell to you; and you; and you, Volumnius.[3644]
    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,[3645]
    My heart doth joy that yet in all my life[3646]
    I found no man but he was true to me.                             35
    I shall have glory by this losing day,
    More than Octavius and Mark Antony
    By this vile conquest shall attain unto.[3647]
    So, fare you well at once; for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history:[3648]                       40
    Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
    That have but labour'd to attain this hour.[3649]

                                 [_Alarum. Cry within_, 'Fly, fly, fly!'

    _Cli._ Fly, my lord, fly.

    _Bru._                     Hence! I will follow.[3650]

                             [_Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius._

    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord:
    Thou art a fellow of a good respect;                              45
    Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it:[3651]
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?

    _Stra._ Give me your hand first: fare you well, my lord.

    _Bru._ Farewell, good Strato. [_Runs on his sword._] CÃ¦sar, now be
        still:[3652]                                                  50
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.[3652]       [_Dies._

     _Alarum. Retreat. Enter_ OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, MESSALA, LUCILIUS,
                         _and the army_.[3653]

    _Oct._ What man is that?[3654]

    _Mes._ My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?

    _Stra._ Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;                        55
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honour by his death.

    _Lucil._ So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,[3655]
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.

    _Oct._ All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.             60
    Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?

    _Stra._ Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.

    _Oct._ Do so, good Messala.[3656]

    _Mes._ How died my master, Strato?[3657]

    _Stra._ I held the sword, and he did run on it.                   65

    _Mes._ Octavius, then take him to follow thee,[3658]
    That did the latest service to my master.

    _Ant._ This was the noblest Roman of them all:
    All the conspirators, save only he,[3659]
    Did that they did in envy of great CÃ¦sar;[3660]                   70
    He only, in a general honest thought[3661][3662]
    And common good to all, made one of them.[3662]
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
    And say to all the world 'This was a man!'                        75

    _Oct._ According to his virtue let us use him,
    With all respect and rites of burial.[3663]
    Within my tent his bones to-night shall lie,
    Most like a soldier, order'd honourably.[3664]
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,                        80
    To part the glories of this happy day.       [_Exeunt._[3665]

FOOTNOTES:

[3521] ACT V. SCENE I.] Rowe. Actus Quintus. Ff.

The plains ...] Capell. The Fields of Philippi, with the two Camps.
Rowe.

[3522] _warn_] _wage_ Hanmer. _wait_ Mason conj.

[3523] _places; and ... bravery_,] Pope. _places, and ... bravery_: Ff.

[3524] _something_] _something's_ Hanmer.

[3525] _even_] _evil_ F4.

[3526] _thou_] _you_ Ritson conj.

[3527] _exigent?_] F3 F4. _exigent._ F1 F2.

[3528] SCENE II. Pope.

Lucilius ... others.] Lucilius ... others, attending. Capell. om. Ff.

[3529] [to his Troops. Capell.

[3530] _posture_] _puncture_ Singer conj.

_are_] _is_ Collier, ed. 2 (Steevens conj.).

[3531] _they_] _you_ Capell.

[3532] _stingless_] _stringless_ Rowe (ed. 1).

_stingless too._] _stingless too?_ Delius conj.

[3533] _O, yes ... sting._] _You threat before you sting._ Pope,
putting the original in the margin.

[3534] _Hack'd_] _Hackt_ F1 F2. _Hack_ F3 F4.

[3535] _you ... hounds_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_teeth_] F3 F4. _teethes_ F1 F2.

[3536] _Whilst_] _While_ Collier (one volume edition).

[3537] _Struck_] F3 F4. _Strooke_ F1 F2.

_you_] om. Pope.

[3538] _Struck...._ Cas. _Flatterers_] As one line, Capell conj.,
omitting _you_.

[3539] _Flatterers!_] _You flatterers!_ Keightley.

_thank_] _you may thank_ Steevens conj.

[3540] _sweat_] Rowe (ed. 2). _swet_ Ff.

[3541] _Look_:] _Behold_, Rowe, arranging as Ff.

[3542] _Look; I ... conspirators_] As in Steevens (1793). One line in
Ff.

[3543] _a sword_] _sword_ S. Walker conj., arranging as Ff.

[3544] _thirty_] _twenty_ Theobald.

[3545] _sword of traitors_] _word of traitor_ Collier MS.

[3546] _traitors' hands_] _traitors_ Reed (1803, 1813, 1821).

[3547] _honourable_] _honourably_ Craik conj.

[3548] _worthless_] _worthles_ F1. _worthies_ F2 F3 F4.

[3549] [ ... their army.] Army. Ff.

[3550] SCENE III. Pope.

_Why ... bark!_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3551] _all is_] _all's_ S. Walker conj., ending the line _Ho!_

[3552] _Ho_,] om. Pope. As a separate line by Steevens (1793).

[3553] [Standing forth] See note (VIII).

[3554] _Messala!_] _Messala._ Ff. _Messala,--_Capell.

[3555] _Messala, ... day_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[3556] _as_] _at_ Keightley.

[3557] _am I_] _I am_ S. Walker conj.

[3558] _former ensign_] _foremost ensign_ Rowe. _forward ensign_
Collier MS. _foremost ensigns_ Lettsom conj.

[3559] _steads_] F3 F4 _steeds_ F1 F2.

_ravens, crows_] _ravenous crows_ Warburton.

[3560] _ready to_] _as 'twould_ Seymour conj.

_up_] om. Pope.

[3561] _perils_] F1. _peril_ F2 F3 F4.

[3562] _Lucilius_] _Lucius_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3563] _rest_] Rowe. _rests_ Ff.

_incertain_] _uncertain_ Capell.

[3564] _By_] _Be_ F2.

[3565] _himself: ... how_,] _himself; ... how,_ Pope. _himselfe, ...
how_: Ff. _himself, ... how,_ Craik.

[3566] _I ... life_] Put in parentheses by Johnson.

[3567] _time_] _term_ Cappell.

_life_:] _life_; Theobald, _life_, Ff. Here Warburton marks a sentence
omitted.

[3568] _some_] _those_ Craik (Collier MS.).

[3569] _this battle_] om. Steevens conj.

[3570] _Thorough_] _Thorew_ F1 F2. _Through_ F3 F4. _Along_ Pope. _By
the proud victors, thro'_ Seymour conj.

_streets_] _street_, Rowe (ed. 2).

[3571] _No, ... Roman_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3572] _the_] F1. _that_ F2 F3 F4.

_begun_] _began_ Collier (Malone conj.).

[3573] SCENE II.] Capell. SCENE IV. Pope.

The field of battle.] Capell.

[3574] Alarum.] Ff. Alarums, as of a Battle join'd. Capell.

[3575] [Loud alarum.] Ff. om. Capell.

[3576] _Octavius'_] Pope. _Octavio's_ Ff.

[3577] _And_] _One_ Hanmer. _A_ Warburton.

[3578] SCENE III.] Capell. Scene continued in Pope.

Another ... field.] Capell.

[3579] Alarums.] Ff. Alarum. Pope.

[3580] _are_] _were_ Pope.

[3581] _further_] _farther_ Collier.

[3582] _far_] _far'_ Dyce (ed. 2).

[3583] _yond_] _yon'_ Capell.

[3584] _get ... hill_] _get thee higher on this hill_ Capell conj.

_higher_] F1. _thither_ F2 F3 F4.

[3585] [Pindarus....] Pindarus goes up. Dyce. Exit Pin. Hanmer. Omitted
in Ff.

[3586] _breathed_] F1 F2. _breath'd_ F3 F4.

[3587] _his_] _its_ Pope.

_Sirrah_,] _Now_ Pope.

[3588] [Above] Ff. Within Hanmer. Appearing on the hill. Jennens.

_my lord_] _my good lord_ Steevens conj.

[3589] [Above] Dyce. Within. Hanmer. om. Ff.

[3590] _Titinius ... joy._] As in Pope, who reads _Titinius_ for _Now,
Titinius_, line 31. In Ff _He's tane_ is in a separate line. Malone
ends the lines _is ... that ... on.--Titinius!-- ... hark!... joy._
Dyce (ed. 2) ends them _about ... spur;-- ... him;--Titinius!-- ...
hark!... joy._

[3591] _Now_,] _Now, now_, Nicholson conj., ending the line _O, he_.

[3592] _down; behold_] _down, Behold_ Capell, ending line 32 at _down_.

[Pindarus disappears. Jennens.

[3593] Pindarus descends.] Dyce. Enter Pindarus. Ff. Re-enter Pindarus.
Capell.

[3594] _Come ... prisoner_;] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[3595] _freeman_] F3 F4. _free-man_ F1 F2.

[3596] _hilts_] _hilt_ Pope.

[3597] [Pindarus stabs him.] Kills him. F2 F3 F4 (after line 46). Kills
himself. Rowe (ed. 2), after line 46.

[3598] [Dies.] Capell. om. Ff.

[3599] _So ... been_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3600] [Exit.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3601] Re-enter ... with] Capell. Enter ... and Ff.

[3602] SCENE V. Pope.

[3603] _to night_] _to-night_ Knight (ed. 1) and Collier (ed. 1).

[3604] _is set_] F1. _it set_ F2 F3 F4.

[3605] _sun_] _sunne_ F1. _sonne_ F2. _son_ F3 F4.

[3606] _O_] om. Pope.

[3607] _What_,] _Why_, Capell.

[3608] [Exit Messala.] Pope. om. Ff.

[3609] [Kills himself.] Dies. Ff. Stabs himself (after line 89). Dies.
Rowe.

[3610] Alarum.] om. Capell.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter Brutus, Messala, yong Cato, Strato,
Volumnius, and Lucillius. Ff.

[3611] SCENE VI. Pope.

[3612] _walks_] _wa'kes_ F2.

[3613] [Low alarums.] om. Capell.

[3614] _whether_] Edd. _where_ Ff. _if_ Pope. _whe'r_ Capell. _whÃªr_
Dyce.

[3615] _The_] _Thou_ Rowe.

_fare_] _far_ F1.

[3616] _moe_] F3 F4. _mo_ F1 F2. _more_ Rowe.

[3617] _Thasos_ Edd. (S. Walker conj.). _Thassos_ Theobald. _Tharsus_
Ff.

[3618] _funerals_] _funeral_ Pope.

[3619] _Labeo_] Hanmer. _Labio_ Ff.

_Flavius_,] F4. _Flavio_ F1. _Flavius_ F2 F3.

[3620] _o'clock_] Theobald. _a clock_ Ff.

[3621] SCENE IV.] Capell. SCENE VII. Pope.

Another....] Capell. The Field of Battel. Pope.

[3622] Alarum.] Alarums. Capell.

Enter ... others.] Capell, substantially. Enter Brutus, Messala, Cato,
Lucillius, and Flavius. Ff.

young Cato,] Dyce. Cato, Ff.

[3623] [Enter Souldiers, and fight. Ff. Charges the retiring Enemy.
Capell.

[3624] Bru.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3625] [Exit.] Pope. Charges them in another Part, and Exit, driving
them in. The Party charg'd by Cato rally, and Cato falls. Capell.

[3626] Lucil.] Jennens. Luc. Ff.

[3627] First Sold.] 1. S. Capell. Sold. Ff.

[3628] _Only I_] _I only_ Hanmer.

_die_:] Here Warburton marks a line, spoken by the soldier, as omitted.

[3629] [Offering money] Johnson. Giving him money. Hanmer. om. Ff.

[3630] _not_] _not, sir_ Capell.

[3631] _the_] Pope (ed. 2). _thee_ Ff.

[3632] Enter Antony.] Capell. After line 15 in Ff.

[3633] [They shew Lucilius. Capell.

[3634] _or alive_] _alive_ Warburton.

[3635] _Brutus, friend_] F4. _Brutus friend_ F1 F2 F3.

[3636] _whether_] Edd. _where_ Ff. if Pope. _whe'r_ Capell.

[3637] _us word_] _us word_, F1. _us_, F2 F3. _us_ F4.

[3638] SCENE V.] Capell. SCENE VIII. Pope.

Another ...] Pope.

[3639] [Whispering.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3640] [Whispering.] Whispers him. Capell. om. Ff.

_Shall_] om. Pope.

[3641] [Low alarums.] F1. Low alarum. F2 F3 F4. Alarum. Pope. Alarm.
Johnson.

[3642] _prithee_] _prethee_ Ff. _pray thee_ Capell.

[3643] _sword-hilts_] _sword hilts_ F1 F2. _swords hilt_ F3 F4.

_whilst_] _whilest_ F1 F2. _while_ F3 F4.

[3644] [Shaking hands severally. Collier (Collier MS.).

[3645] _thee too, Strato. Countrymen_,] Theobald. _thee, to Strato,
Countrymen_: Ff.

[3646] _in_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[3647] _this_] _their_ S. Walker conj.

[3648] _life's_] Rowe (ed. 2). _lives_ Ff.

[3649] [Alarum.] Alarums. Capell.

[3650] _follow_] _follow thee_ Pope.

[Exeunt ...] Capell. om. Ff.

[3651] _smatch_] _smack_ Steevens.

_in it_] _in't_ Pope.

[3652] [Runs on his sword ... [Dies.] He runs on his Sword and dies.
Rowe, after line 51. Dyes. Ff, after line 51.

[3653] Alarum.] Alarums.] Capell.

Octavius, Antony,] Capell. Antony, Octavius, Ff.

the army.] their army. Malone.

[3654] SCENE IX. Pope.

[3655] Lucil.] Jennens. Luci. Ff.

[3656] _good_] om. Capell, reading 63, 64 as one line.

[3657] _master_] F1. om. F2. _Lord_ F3 F4.

[3658] _then take him_] _take him then_ Hanmer.

[3659] _he_] _him_ Seymour conj.

[3660] _that_] _what_ So quoted by S. Walker.

[3661] _general honest_] _general-honest_ S. Walker conj.

[3662] _general ... And_] _generous ... Of_ Craik (Collier MS.).

[3663] _With all_] F3 F4. _Withall_ F1 F2.

[3664] _order'd_] Pope, _ordered_ Ff.

[3665] [Exeunt.] Capell. Exeunt omnes. Ff.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

DRAMATIS PERSONÃ. Rowe has 'Artemidorus, a Soothsayer,'--'Artimedorus a
Sooth-sayer' in the first edition--which was altered by Theobald, who
described Artemidorus as 'a Sophist of Cnidos,' and made the Soothsayer
a separate person.

The Acts, but not the Scenes, are marked in the Folios.


NOTE II.

II. 1. 73. In both the editions of Pope this line is ludicrously
printed thus:

    'No, Sir, their--are pluckt about their ears.'

He seems to have thought that 'hat' was an intolerable anachronism,
for in Coriolanus, II. 3. 92 and 160, he has substituted 'cap.' In
this passage it would seem that he could not make up his mind and left
a blank accordingly. It is noticed in one of Theobald's letters to
Warburton (Nichols's _Illustrations_, Vol. II. p. 493).


NOTE III.

II. 1. 189. Jennens quotes '_and_ wildness' as the reading of Rowe's
Octavo. Two lines below he quotes 'laugh at _us_ hereafter' as from
the same edition. In I. 2. 110, he says that Rowe's Octavo reads 'we
arrive' for 'arrive;' in I. 2. 163, that it reads 'would you' for 'you
would;' in I. 2. 170, that it reads 'But' for 'Both;' in I. 3. 85, that
it omits 'say;' in III. 1. 207, that it reads 'Sing'd.' In none of
these cases does our copy of Rowe correspond with his statements.


NOTE IV.

III. 2. 109. We transcribe a portion of Pope's note on this passage:

                  '"CÃ¦sar has had great wrong.
    _3 Pleb._ CÃ¦sar had never wrong, but with just cause."

If ever there was such a line written by Shakespear, I shou'd fancy
it might have its place here, and very humorously in the character of
a Plebeian.' He refers to Ben Jonson's quotation in the _Sylva_ or
_Discoveries_, which has been much discussed by the commentators on
III. 1. 47. Jonson's words are: 'Many times he [i.e. Shakespeare] fell
into those things, could not escape laughter: as when he said in the
person of CÃ¦sar, one speaking to him, "CÃ¦sar thou dost me wrong." He
replied "CÃ¦sar did never wrong but with just cause," and such like;
which were ridiculous.' Vol. IX. pp. 175, 176. ed. 1816. There is
another reference to Shakespeare's supposed blunder in the Induction to
Ben Jonson's _Staple of News_, first acted in 1625: '_Prologue_. Cry
you mercy, you never did wrong, but with just cause.' Vol. V. p. 162.
Gifford in his note supposes that Metellus Cimber's speech and CÃ¦sar's
reply, as they are found in the Folio of 1623, are due to the 'botchery
of the players,' and that they originally stood thus:

    '_Met._ CÃ¦sar, thou dost me wrong.
    _CÃ¦s._ CÃ¦sar did never wrong, but with just cause.'

But surely the first twelve lines of CÃ¦sar's reply, to which Gifford
makes no allusion, cannot have been written by any other hand than
Shakespeare's. On the whole it seems more probable that Jonson, quoting
from memory, quoted wrong, than that the passage was altered in
consequence of his censure, which was first made, publicly, in 1625.


NOTE V.

III. 2. 202. The arrangement given in the text, suggested by Mr
Grant White and Dr Delius, was first printed by us in the _Globe
Shakespeare_ and has been adopted by Mr Dyce in his second edition.
The folios continue the words to the second citizen, thus:

    '2. We will be reveng'd: Revenge
    About, seeke, burne, fire, kill, slay,
    Let not a Traitor live.'

See Coriolanus, Note (VII). Perhaps the speech given to _Sec. Cit._
lines 206, 207, should be also given to _All_, as Dr Delius has also
suggested. The same remark may apply to the speech of _Third Cit._ at
the end of Scene 3.


NOTE VI.

IV. 1. Rowe and Pope give 'Rome' for the Scene. Theobald places it
on 'a small Island near Mutina.' In his note he says, 'Shakespeare,
I dare say, knew from _Plutarch_, that these Triumvirs met, upon
the Proscription, in a little Island: which _Appian_, who is more
particular, says, lay near _Mutina_ upon the River _Lavinius_.' Hanmer
makes the scene at 'A small Island in the little River Rhenus near
Bononia.' Warburton cuts the knot by omitting to indicate the scene.
Johnson followed Theobald. Capell put 'A Room in Antony's House,' which
is adopted by Malone and modern editors generally. Mr Knight says,
'The triumvirs, it is well known, did not meet at Rome to settle their
proscription. But it is evident that Shakspere places his scene at
Rome, by Lepidus being sent to CÃ¦sar's house, and told that he shall
find his confederates "or here, or at the Capitol."'


NOTE VII.

IV. 2. 50, 52. The ingenious alteration made by Mr Craik cures the
defective metre of line 50 and gets rid of the incongruous 'association
of an officer of rank and a servant boy' in line 52. We have not
however adopted it, because we are of opinion that the error, such as
it is, is due to the author and not to a transcriber. In the first
place, irregularities of metre are especially frequent, as Mr Dyce
and others have pointed out, where proper names occur; and, secondly,
an incongruity which was unnoticed by a long series of commentators
may well have escaped the observation of a writer among whose merits
minute accuracy cannot be ranked. Moreover in Shakespeare's eyes Lucius
was probably a page of gentle birth, with whom Titinius might not
unfitly be associated; and the office of guarding a door is at least as
suitable to him as that of carrying a message to an army. In the next
scene, both Lucius and Lucilius are in attendance.


NOTE VIII.

V. 1. 69, 70. The stage directions given in the text are compounded
of that given in the Folios and that given by Rowe. The Folios after
'hark, a word with you,' add _Lucillius and Messala stand forth_,
which Capell was the first to omit. Rowe retaining those words added,
_Brutus speaks apart to Lucilius_.




MACBETH.




DRAMATIS PERSONÃ[3666].


  DUNCAN, king of Scotland.
  MALCOLM,    }
  DONALBAIN,  }  his sons.
  MACBETH,  }
  BANQUO,   }  generals of the King's army.
  MACDUFF,    }
  LENNOX,     }
  ROSS,       }
  MENTEITH,   }  noblemen of Scotland.
  ANGUS,      }
  CAITHNESS,  }
  FLEANCE, son to Banquo.
  SIWARD, earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces.
  Young SIWARD, his son.
  SEYTON, an officer attending on Macbeth.
  Boy, son to Macduff.
  An English Doctor.
  A Scotch Doctor.
  A Sergeant.
  A Porter.
  An Old Man.

  Lady MACBETH.
  Lady MACDUFF.
  Gentlewoman[3667] attending on Lady Macbeth.

  HECATE.
  Three Witches.
  Apparitions.

   Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murderers, Attendants, and
                              Messengers.

                      SCENE: _Scotland: England._

                             THE TRAGEDY OF

                                MACBETH.

FOOTNOTES:

[3666] First given by Rowe; more fully by Capell.

[3667] Gentlewoman ...] Capell. Gentlewomen ... Rowe.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _A desert place._[3668]

             _Thunder and lightning. Enter three_ Witches.

    _First Witch._ When shall we three meet again[3669]
    In thunder, lightning, or in rain?[3670]

    _Sec. Witch._ When the hurlyburly's done,[3671]
    When the battle's lost and won.

    _Third Witch._ That will be ere the set of sun.[3672]              5

    _First Witch._ Where the place?

    _Sec. Witch._                   Upon the heath.

    _Third Witch._ There to meet with Macbeth.[3673]

    _First Witch._ I come, Graymalkin.[3674]

    _All._ Paddock calls:--anon![3675][3676][3677]
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.[3675][3676][3678]                 10
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.[3675]      [_Exeunt._[3679]


SCENE II. _A camp near Forres._[3680]

       _Alarum within. Enter_ DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX,
        _with_ Attendants, _meeting a bleeding_ Sergeant.[3681]

    _Dun._ What bloody man is that? He can report,[3682]
    As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
    The newest state.

    _Mal._            This is the sergeant[3683]
    Who like a good and hardy soldier fought[3683][3684]
    'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend![3684][3685]              5
    Say to the king the knowledge of the broil[3686]
    As thou didst leave it.

    _Ser._                  Doubtful it stood;[3687]
    As two spent swimmers, that do cling together[3688]
    And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald--[3689]
    Worthy to be a rebel, for to that                                 10
    The multiplying villanies of nature[3690]
    Do swarm upon him--from the western isles
    Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;[3691]
    And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,[3692]
    Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak:[3693]            15
    For brave Macbeth--well he deserves that name--
    Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel,[3694]
    Which smoked with bloody execution,
    Like valour's minion carved out his passage[3695][3696]
    Till he faced the slave;[3695][3697]                              20
    Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,[3698]
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,[3699]
    And fix'd his head upon our battlements.

    _Dun._ O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!

    _Ser._ As whence the sun 'gins his reflection[3700]               25
    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,[3701]
    So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
    Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark:[3702]
    No sooner justice had, with valour arm'd,
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,[3703]        30
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men,[3704]
    Began a fresh assault.

    _Dun._                 Dismay'd not this[3705]
    Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?[3705][3706]

    _Ser._                            Yes;[3707]
    As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.[3707]                   35
    If I say sooth, I must report they were
    As cannons overcharged with double cracks;[3708]
    So they[3709]
    Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:[3710]
    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,[3711]               40
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
    I cannot tell--[3712][3713]
    But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.[3712]

    _Dun._ So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;[3714]
    They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons.[3715]             45

                                             [_Exit Sergeant, attended._

    Who comes here?[3716]

                             _Enter_ ROSS.

    _Mal._     The worthy thane of Ross.

    _Len._ What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he
        look[3717][3718]
    That seems to speak things strange.[3718][3719]

    _Ross._                             God save the king!

    _Dun._ Whence camest thou, worthy thane?

    _Ross._                                  From Fife, great king;
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky[3720]                    50
    And fan our people cold.[3721]
    Norway himself, with terrible numbers,[3721][3722]
    Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
    The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;[3723]
    Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,                  55
    Confronted him with self-comparisons,
    Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,[3724]
    Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,[3725]
    The victory fell on us.

    _Dun._                  Great happiness!

    _Ross._ That now[3726]                                            60
    Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition;[3726][3727]
    Nor would we deign him burial of his men
    Till he disbursed, at Saint Colme's inch,[3728]
    Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

    _Dun._ No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive                 65
    Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,[3729]
    And with his former title greet Macbeth.[3730]

    _Ross._ I'll see it done.

    _Dun._ What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A heath._

                  _Thunder. Enter the three_ Witches.

    _First Witch._ Where hast thou been, sister?[3731]

    _Sec. Witch._ Killing swine.

    _Third Witch._ Sister, where thou?[3732]

    _First Witch._ A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
    And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd. 'Give me,' quoth I:[3733]  5
    'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.[3734]
    Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:
    But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
    And, like a rat without a tail,
    I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.[3735]                              10

    _Sec. Witch._ I'll give thee a wind.

    _First Witch._ Thou'rt kind.[3736]

    _Third Witch._ And I another.

    _First Witch._ I myself have all the other;
    And the very ports they blow,[3737]                               15
    All the quarters that they know[3738]
    I' the shipman's card.[3739]
    I will drain him dry as hay:[3740]
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Hang upon his pent-house lid;                                     20
    He shall live a man forbid:
    Weary se'nnights nine times nine[3741]
    Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
    Though his bark cannot be lost,
    Yet it shall be tempest-tost.                                     25
    Look what I have.

    _Sec. Witch._ Show me, show me.

    _First Witch._ Here I have a pilot's thumb,
    Wreck'd as homeward he did come.                     [_Drum within._

    _Third Witch._ A drum, a drum!                                    30
    Macbeth doth come.[3742]

    _All._ The weird sisters, hand in hand,[3743]
    Posters of the sea and land,[3744]
    Thus do go about, about:
    Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,[3745]                        35
    And thrice again, to make up nine.
    Peace! the charm's wound up.

                  _Enter_ MACBETH _and_ BANQUO.[3746]

    _Macb._ So foul and fair a day I have not seen.[3747]

    _Ban._ How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these[3748]
    So wither'd, and so wild in their attire,                         40
    That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,[3749]
    And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
    That man may question? You seem to understand me,
    By each at once her choppy finger laying
    Upon her skinny lips: you should be women,                        45
    And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
    That you are so.

    _Macb._     Speak, if you can: what are you?

    _First Witch._ All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!

    _Sec. Witch._ All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!

    _Third Witch._ All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!   50

    _Ban._ Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear
    Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,[3750]
    Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
    Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
    You greet with present grace and great prediction                 55
    Of noble having and of royal hope,
    That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not:[3751]
    If you can look into the seeds of time,
    And say which grain will grow and which will not,[3752]
    Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear                        60
    Your favours nor your hate.

    _First Witch._ Hail!

    _Sec. Witch._ Hail!

    _Third Witch._ Hail!

    _First Witch._ Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.                  65

    _Sec. Witch._ Not so happy, yet much happier.

    _Third Witch._ Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
    So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo![3753]

    _First Witch._ Banquo and Macbeth, all hail![3754]

    _Macb._ Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:               70
    By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis;[3755]
    But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives,
    A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
    Stands not within the prospect of belief,
    No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence                        75
    You owe this strange intelligence? or why
    Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
    With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.[3756]

                                                      [_Witches vanish._

    _Ban._ The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them: whither are they vanish'd?                 80

    _Macb._ Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted[3757]
    As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd![3757]

    _Ban._ Were such things here as we do speak about?
    Or have we eaten on the insane root[3758]
    That takes the reason prisoner?                                   85

    _Macb._ Your children shall be kings.

    _Ban._                                You shall be king.

    _Macb._ And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?

    _Ban._ To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?[3759]

                       _Enter_ ROSS _and_ ANGUS.

    _Ross._ The king hath happily received, Macbeth,[3760]
    The news of thy success: and when he reads                        90
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,[3761]
    His wonders and his praises do contend[3762]
    Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,[3762][3763]
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,                        95
    Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,[3764]
    Strange images of death. As thick as hail[3765][3766]
    Came post with post, and every one did bear[3766][3767]
    Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence,
    And pour'd them down before him.

    _Aug._                           We are sent[3768]               100
    To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;[3769][3770]
    Only to herald thee into his sight,[3769]
    Not pay thee.

    _Ross._       And for an earnest of a greater honour,
    He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor:[3771]           105
    In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
    For it is thine.

    _Ban._           What, can the devil speak true?

    _Macb._ The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me[3772]
    In borrow'd robes?[3772][3773]

    _Ang._             Who was the thane lives yet,
    But under heavy judgement bears that life                        110
    Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined[3774]
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel[3774][3775]
    With hidden help and vantage, or that with both[3774][3776]
    He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not;[3774]
    But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,                      115
    Have overthrown him.

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor:[3777]
    The greatest is behind.--Thanks for your pains.--[3778]
    Do you not hope your children shall be kings,[3779]
    When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me
    Promised no less to them?

    _Ban._                    That, trusted home,[3780]              120
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange:
    And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
    The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
    Win us with honest trifles, to betray 's[3781]                   125
    In deepest consequence.[3782]
    Cousins, a word, I pray you.[3782]

    _Macb._       [_Aside_] Two truths are told,[3783]
    As happy prologues to the swelling act
    Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen.
    [_Aside_] This supernatural soliciting[3784]                     130
    Cannot be ill; cannot be good: if ill,[3785][3786]
    Why hath it given me earnest of success,[3786]
    Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor:[3787]
    If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
    Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair[3788]                      135
    And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
    Against the use of nature? Present fears[3789]
    Are less than horrible imaginings:
    My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,[3790]
    Shakes so my single state of man that function[3791]             140
    Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is[3791]
    But what is not.[3791][3792]

    _Ban._           Look, how our partner's rapt.

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown
        me,[3793]
    Without my stir.

    _Ban._           New honours come upon him,
    Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould             145
    But with the aid of use.[3794]

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] Come what come may,[3795]
    Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

    _Ban._ Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.

    _Macb._ Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought[3796]
    With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains[3796][3797]    150
    Are register'd where every day I turn[3796]
    The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king.[3796]
    Think upon what hath chanced, and at more time,[3796][3798]
    The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak[3799]
    Our free hearts each to other.

    _Ban._                         Very gladly.                      155

    _Macb._ Till then, enough. Come, friends.[3800]        [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _Forres. The palace._[3801]

     _Flourish. Enter_ DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, _and_
                           Attendants.[3802]

    _Dun._ Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not[3803]
    Those in commission yet return'd?

    _Mal._                           My liege,[3804]
    They are not yet come back. But I have spoke[3804]
    With one that saw him die, who did report[3804]
    That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,[3804]                 5
    Implored your highness' pardon and set forth[3804]
    A deep repentance: nothing in his life[3804]
    Became him like the leaving it; he died[3804]
    As one that had been studied in his death,
    To throw away the dearest thing he owed[3805]                     10
    As 'twere a careless trifle.

    _Dun._                       There's no art
    To find the mind's construction in the face:
    He was a gentleman on whom I built
    An absolute trust.

              _Enter_ MACBETH, BANQUO, ROSS, _and_ ANGUS.

                       O worthiest cousin![3806]
    The sin of my ingratitude even now                                15
    Was heavy on me: thou art so far before[3807]
    That swiftest wing of recompense is slow[3808]
    To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,[3809]
    That the proportion both of thanks and payment
    Might have been mine! only I have left to say,[3810]              20
    More is thy due than more than all can pay.[3811]

    _Macb._ The service and the loyalty I owe,
    In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part[3812]
    Is to receive our duties: and our duties[3812]
    Are to your throne and state, children and servants;[3812]        25
    Which do but what they should, by doing every thing[3812][3813]
    Safe toward your love and honour.[3812][3813][3814]

    _Dun._                            Welcome hither:
    I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
    To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
    That hast no less deserved, nor must be known[3815]               30
    No less to have done so: let me infold thee
    And hold thee to my heart.

    _Ban._                     There if I grow,
    The harvest is your own.

    _Dun._                   My plenteous joys,
    Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
    In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,[3816]                  35
    And you whose places are the nearest, know,
    We will establish our estate upon
    Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
    The Prince of Cumberland: which honour must
    Not unaccompanied invest him only,[3817]                          40
    But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
    On all deservers. From hence to Inverness,[3818]
    And bind us further to you.[3819]

    _Macb._ The rest is labour, which is not used for you:[3819]
    I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful[3820]               45
    The hearing of my wife with your approach;
    So humbly take my leave.

    _Dun._                   My worthy Cawdor!

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step,[3821]
    On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
    For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;                    50
    Let not light see my black and deep desires:[3822]
    The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be
    Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.               [_Exit._

    _Dun._ True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant,[3823]
    And in his commendations I am fed;                                55
    It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,[3824]
    Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
    It is a peerless kinsman.       [_Flourish. Exeunt._[3825]


SCENE V. _Inverness. Macbeth's castle._[3826]

            _Enter_ LADY MACBETH, _reading a letter_.[3827]

    _Lady M._ 'They met me in the day of success; and I[3828]
    have learned by the perfectest report, they have more in[3829]
    them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to
    question them further, they made themselves air, into which
    they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it,[3830]      5
    came missives from the king, who all-hailed me "Thane[3831]
    of Cawdor;" by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted[3832]
    me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with
    "Hail, king that shalt be!" This have I thought good to[3833]
    deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou          10
    mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant[3834]
    of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart,
    and farewell.'
    Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be[3835]
    What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature;[3836]           15
    It is too full o' the milk of human kindness[3837]
    To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great;
    Art not without ambition, but without
    The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,
    That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,                 20
    And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis,[3838][3839]
    That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it;[3838][3839]
    And that which rather thou dost fear to do[3839]
    Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither,[3839][3840]
    That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,                          25
    And chastise with the valour of my tongue
    All that impedes thee from the golden round,[3841]
    Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem[3842]
    To have thee crown'd withal.[3843]

                       _Enter a_ Messenger.[3844]

                                 What is your tidings?

    _Mess._ The king comes here to-night.

    _Lady M._                             Thou'rt mad to say it:[3845]  30
    Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
    Would have inform'd for preparation.

    _Mess._ So please you, it is true: our thane is coming:[3845]
    One of my fellows had the speed of him,
    Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more                    35
    Than would make up his message.

    _Lady M._                       Give him tending;
    He brings great news.                             [_Exit Messenger._
                          The raven himself is hoarse[3846]
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    Under my battlements. Come, you spirits[3847]
    That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,[3848]                40
    And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
    Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,[3849]
    Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
    That no compunctious visitings of nature
    Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between[3850]               45
    The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,[3851]
    And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,[3852]
    Wherever in your sightless substances
    You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
    And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,                       50
    That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
    Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark,[3853]
    To cry 'Hold, hold!'

                            _Enter_ MACBETH.

                         Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor![3854]
    Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
    Thy letters have transported me beyond                            55
    This ignorant present, and I feel now[3855]
    The future in the instant.

    _Macb._                    My dearest love,[3856]
    Duncan comes here to-night.

    _Lady M._                   And when goes hence?

    _Macb._ To-morrow, as he purposes.

    _Lady M._                          O, never
    Shall sun that morrow see![3857]                                  60
    Your face, my thane, is as a book where men[3858]
    May read strange matters. To beguile the time,[3859]
    Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
    Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
    But be the serpent under't. He that's coming                      65
    Must be provided for: and you shall put
    This night's great business into my dispatch;
    Which shall to all our nights and days to come
    Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

    _Macb._ We will speak further.

    _Lady Macb._                    Only look up clear;               70
    To alter favour ever is to fear:[3860]
    Leave all the rest to me.                                 [_Exeunt._


SCENE VI. _Before Macbeth's castle._[3861]

       _Hautboys and torches. Enter_ DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN,
      BANQUO, LENNOX, MACDUFF, ROSS, ANGUS, and Attendants.[3862]

    _Dun._ This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air[3863][3864]
    Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself[3864]
    Unto our gentle senses.[3865]

    _Ban._                  This guest of summer,
    The temple-haunting martlet, does approve[3866]
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven's breath[3867]              5
    Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,[3868][3869]
    Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird[3868][3870]
    Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle:[3868][3871]
    Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed[3868][3871][3872]
    The air is delicate.[3868]

                         _Enter_ LADY MACBETH.

    _Dun._               See, see, our honour'd hostess![3868][3873]  10
    The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,[3874]
    Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you[3875]
    How you shall bid God'ild us for your pains,[3875][3876]
    And thank us for your trouble.

    _Lady M._                      All our service
    In every point twice done, and then done double,                  15
    Were poor and single business to contend
    Against those honours deep and broad wherewith[3877]
    Your majesty loads our house: for those of old,[3877]
    And the late dignities heap'd up to them,[3877]
    We rest your hermits.[3877]

    _Dun._                Where's the thane of Cawdor?[3877][3878]    20
    We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose
    To be his purveyor: but he rides well,
    And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him[3879]
    To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,[3880]
    We are your guest to-night.

    _Lady M._                   Your servants ever                    25
    Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,[3881]
    To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
    Still to return your own.

    _Dun._                    Give me your hand;
    Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,[3882]
    And shall continue our graces towards him.                        30
    By your leave, hostess.           [_Exeunt._[3883]


SCENE VII. _Macbeth's castle._[3884]

     _Hautboys and torches. Enter a_ Sewer, _and divers_ Servants
    _with dishes and service and pass over the stage. Then enter_
                            MACBETH.[3885]

    _Macb._ If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well[3886]
    It were done quickly: if the assassination[3886][3887]
    Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
    With his surcease, success; that but this blow[3888]
    Might be the be-all and the end-all here,[3889]                    5
    But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,[3890]
    We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
    We still have judgement here; that we but teach
    Bloody instructions, which being taught return[3891]
    To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice[3892][3893]      10
    Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice[3892][3894]
    To our own lips. He's here in double trust:
    First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
    Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
    Who should against his murderer shut the door,                    15
    Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
    Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been[3895]
    So clear in his great office, that his virtues
    Will plead like angels trumpet-tongued against[3896]
    The deep damnation of his taking-off;                             20
    And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
    Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed[3897]
    Upon the sightless couriers of the air,[3898]
    Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
    That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur                   25
    To prick the sides of my intent, but only
    Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself[3899]
    And falls on the other.[3900]

                      _Enter_ LADY MACBETH.[3901]

    How now! what news?

    _Lady M._ He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?[3902]

    _Macb._ Hath he ask'd for me?

    _Lady M._                     Know you not he has?[3903]          30

    _Macb._ We will proceed no further in this business:
    He hath honour'd me of late; and I have bought
    Golden opinions from all sorts of people,[3904]
    Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,[3905]
    Not cast aside so soon.

    _Lady M._               Was the hope drunk                        35
    Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since?[3906]
    And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
    At what it did so freely? From this time[3907]
    Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard[3908]
    To be the same in thine own act and valour                        40
    As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that[3909]
    Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,
    And live a coward in thine own esteem,[3909]
    Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,'
    Like the poor cat i' the adage?[3910]

    _Macb._                         Prithee, peace:                   45
    I dare do all that may become a man;
    Who dares do more is none.[3911]

    _Lady M._                  What beast was't then
    That made you break this enterprise to me?
    When you durst do it, then you were a man;
    And, to be more than what you were, you would                     50
    Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place[3912]
    Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:[3913]
    They have made themselves, and that their fitness now[3914]
    Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
    How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me:                   55
    I would, while it was smiling in my face,
    Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums,
    And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you[3915][3916]
    Have done to this.[3915][3917]

    _Macb._            If we should fail?

    _Lady M._                             We fail!
    But screw your courage to the sticking-place,                     60
    And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep--
    Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey[3918]
    Soundly invite him--his two chamberlains
    Will I with wine and wassail so convince[3919]
    That memory, the warder of the brain,                             65
    Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
    A limbec only: when in swinish sleep
    Their drenched natures lie as in a death,[3920]
    What cannot you and I perform upon
    The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon                           70
    His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
    Of our great quell?

    _Macb._             Bring forth men-children only;
    For thy undaunted mettle should compose[3921]
    Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
    When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two                   75
    Of his own chamber, and used their very daggers,
    That they have done't?

    _Lady M._              Who dares receive it other,
    As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar
    Upon his death?

    _Macb._         I am settled, and bend up[3922]
    Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.                        80
    Away, and mock the time with fairest show:[3923]
    False face must hide what the false heart doth know.[3923]

                                                              [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[3668] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. ScÃ¦na Prima. Ff.

A desert place.] An open Heath. Rowe. An open place. Theobald. om Ff.

[3669] _again_] Hanmer. _againe?_ F1 F2. _again?_ F3 F4.

[3670] _or_] _and_ Hanmer.

[3671] _done_] _over_ A. Hunter.

[3672] _the_] om. Pope.

[3673] _to meet with Macbeth_] _I go to meet Macbeth_ Pope. _to meet
with great Macbeth_ Capell. _we go to meet Macbeth_ A. Hunter
(Jennens conj.). _to meet with_--1. Witch. _Whom?_ 2. Witch. _Macbeth._
Rann (Steevens conj.). _to meet and greet Macbeth_ Jackson conj. _to
meet with thane Macbeth_ Nicholson conj.

[3674] _I come_] _I come, I come_ Pope, putting _Grimalkin_ in a
separate line.

[Spirits call in succession. Nicholson conj.

[3675] All. _Paddock ... air._] 2. Witch. _Padocke calls--anon!_ All.
_Fair ... air._ Pope. 2. Witch. _Paddock calls._ 3. Witch. _Anon._
All. _Fair ... air._ Grant White (Hunter conj.).

[3676] _Paddock ... fair._] Two lines in Pope. One in Ff.

[3677] _calls:--anon!_] _calls--anon--_ Rowe. _calls anon_: Ff.

[3678] _foul is fair_] _foul sfair_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3679] _the_] om. Pope.

[Exeunt.] Ff. They rise from the Stage, and fly away. Rowe. Witches
vanish. Malone.

[3680] A camp ...] Capell. A Palace. Rowe. The Palace at Forres.
Theobald.

[3681] Alarum within] om. Rowe.

Duncan,] Capell. King, Ff.

Sergeant.] Edd. Captaine. Ff. Soldier. Capell.

[3682] Dun.] Capell. King. Ff. (and throughout).

[3683] _sergeant Who ... good_] _serjeant, who Like a right good_
Hanmer.

[3684] _soldier fought 'Gainst_] _soldier Fought against_ S. Walker
conj., or supposes some words to be lost.

[3685] _Hail_] _Haile_ F1. _Haile: haile_ F2. _Hail, hail_ F3 F4.
_Hail, my_ S. Walker conj.

[3686] _the knowledge_] _thy knowledge_ Keightley (Collier MS. and S.
Walker conj.).

[3687] _Doubtful_] _Doubtful long_ Pope. _Doubtfully_ Steevens (1793).

_it_] _it had_ Anon. conj.

_stood_;] Here Keightley marks a line omitted.

[3688] _two_] _to_ Warburton.

_spent_] _expert_ Jennens.

[3689] _Macdonwald_] F1. _Macdonnell_ F2 F3 F4.

[3690] _villanies_] F1 F4. _Villaines_ F2 F3.

[3691] _Of_] _With_ Hanmer.

_gallowglasses_] _Gallow glasses_ F2 F3 F4. _Gallowgrosses_ F1.

_is_] _was_ Pope.

[3692] _damned quarrel_] Hanmer (Warburton and Johnson). _damned
quarry_ Ff. _damped quarry_ Jackson conj.

[3693] _a rebel's_] _the rebel's_ Hanmer.

_all's too weak_] _all too weak_ Pope. _all-to-weak_ Hunter conj.

[3694] _Disdaining fortune_] _Like valour's minion_ Mitford conj.

[3695] _Like ... slave_:] As in Ff. Steevens (1793) ends the first line
_minion._ Keightley marks an omission after _minion_ and after _slave._

[3696] _Like valour's minion_] om. Mitford conj.

_carved_] Rowe (ed. 2). _carv'd_ Ff.

[3697] _he_] _he had_ Pope.

[3698] _Which ne'er_] Knight. _Which nev'r_ F1 F2 F3. _Which never_
F4. _Who ne'er_ Pope. _And ne'er_ Capell. _When he ne'er_ Nicholson
conj.

_Which ... hands_] _And ne'er slack'd hand_ Bullock conj.

_bade_] Steevens (1778). _bad_ F1 F2 F3. _bid_ F4.

[3699] _nave_] _nape_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_chaps_] _chops_ Ff.

[3700] _'gins_] F1. _gins_ F2 F3 F4. _gives_ Pope.

[3701] _Shipwrecking ... break_] _Burst forth shipwrecking storms and
direful thunders_ Anon. conj.

_thunders break_,] Pope. _thunders_: F1. _thunders breaking_ F2 F3 F4.
_thunders burst_, or _thunders threat_, S. Walker conj.

[3702] _Discomfort swells_] _Discomfort swell'd_ Pope. _Discomforts
well'd_ Johnson (Thirlby conj.). _Discomfit well'd_ Warburton.
_Discomfort wells_ Capell.

[3703] _kerns_] _kernes_ Ff. _kermes_ Johnson.

[3704] _furbish'd_] _furbusht_ Ff.

[3705] _Dismayed ... Banquo?_] As in Pope. Prose in Ff.

[3706] _captains_] _captains twain_ S. Walker conj.

_Macbeth_] _brave Macbeth_ Hanmer.

[3707] _Yes; ... lion._] As in Pope. Two lines, ending _eagles ...
lyon_, in Ff.

[3708] _overcharged with_] _overcharg'd; with_ Theobald. _charg'd
with_ Seymour conj. (reading _As ... they_ as one line).

[3709] _So they_] As a separate line in Steevens. In Ff _So they_
begins line 39, in Globe ed. ends line 37. Before or after these words
Grant White conjectures the rest of a line to be lost. Keightley marks
the omission of part of a line before _So they_.

[3710] _Doubly_] om. Pope, reading _So ... foe_ as one line.

[3711] _reeking_] F1 F4. _recking_ F2 F3.

[3712] _I ... help._] As in Rowe. Two lines, the first ending _faint_,
in Ff.

[3713] _tell--_] Rowe. _tell_: Ff.

[3714] _So_] _As_ A. Hunter.

[3715] [Exit ...] Exeunt some with the Soldier. Capell. Exit Soldier,
attended. Malone. om. Ff.

[3716] _Who_] _But who_ Pope. _Who is't_ Steevens conj.

_here?_] _here now?_ Keightley.

Enter Ross.] Steevens (after line 45). Enter Rosse and Angus. Ff (after
line 45). Transferred by Dyce to follow _strange_, line 48.

[3717] _a haste_] F1. _hast_ F2 F3 F4. _haste_ Rowe.

[3718] _So ... strange_] As in Hanmer. One line in Ff. Given to
Malcolm, Upton conj.

[3719] _seems_] _teems_ Johnson conj. _comes_ Collier (Collier MS.).
_seeks_ or _deems_ Anon. conj.

[3720] _flout the_] _float i' the_ Becket conj. _Did flout the_
Keightley, reading _From ... cold_ as two lines, the first ending
_banners_.

[3721] _And ... himself_,] One line, S. Walker conj.

[3722] _Norway himself, with_] _Norway, himself with_ Theobald.

_terrible numbers_,] _numbers terrible_, Pope. _terrible numbers,
there_ Keightley.

[3723] _began_] _'gan_ Pope.

[3724] _point rebellious, arm_] Theobald. _point, rebellious arme_ Ff.

[3725] _and_] om. Pope.

[3726] _That ... composition_] As in Steevens (1778). Two lines, the
first ending _king_, in Ff.

_That now ... the Norway's_] _Now ... Norway's_ Pope, reading
_Now ... composition_ as one line.

[3727] _Sweno_] om. Steevens conj., reading _That ... composition_ as
one line.

_Norways'_] Steevens (1778). _Norwayes_ Ff. _Norway's_ Rowe.

[3728] _Colme's inch_] _Colmes ynch_ F1. _Colmes-hill_ F2 F3 F4.
_Colmes-kill-isle_ Pope. _Colmkil-isle_ Hanmer. _Colme's hill_
Capell. _Colmes' inch_ Steevens.

[3729] _bosom interest_] _bosom trust_ Capell conj. _bosom's trust_
Anon. conj. _bisson trust_ Anon. conj. _trusting boson_ Anon. conj.

_go_] om. Capell conj.

_present_] om. Pope.

[3730] _greet_] F1. _great_ F2 F3 F4. A heath] Capell. The heath. Rowe.

[3731] _thou_] om. Steevens conj.

[3732] _Sister_] om. Steevens conj.

[3733] _Give ... I_:] As in Pope. A separate line in Ff.

[3734] _Aroint thee_] _Aroynt thee_ F1 F2. _Anoynt thee_ F3 F4. _I've
rauntree_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LIV. p. 731). _A rauntree_ Anon.
conj. (Gent. Mag. LV. p. 535). _A rown-tree_ A. Hunter. _Aroint the_
Becket conj.

[3735] _and I'll do_] _and I'll not fail_ Jackson conj.

[3736] _Thou'rt_] Capell. _Th'art_ Ff. _Thou art_ Pope.

[3737] _very_] _various_ Johnson conj.

_ports_] _points_ Pope.

[3738] _know_] _know_, F1. _know._ F2 F3 F4.

[3739] _card._] _card to show._ Collier (Collier MS.).

[3740] _I will_] Pope. _Ile_ F1. _I'le_ F2 F3. _I'll_ F4.

[3741] _se'nnights_] _sev'nights_ Ff. _seven-nights_ Dyce.

[3742] C. Lofft conjectured that the play should begin with this line;
Strutt that it should commence with the following line.

[3743] _weird_] Theobald. _weyward_ Ff. _weyard_ Keightley.

[3744] _of_] _o'er_ A. Hunter.

[3745] _Thrice_] _Thice_ F2.

[3746] Banquo.] Banquo, with Soldiers and other Attendants. Rowe.
Banquo, journeying; Soldiers, and Others, at a Distance. Capell.

[3747] SCENE IV. Pope.

[3748] _Forres_] _Foris_ Pope. _Soris_ Ff.

[3749] _the inhabitants o' the_] _inhabitants of_ Pope.

[3750] [To the Witches. Rowe.

[3751] _rapt_] Pope. _wrapt_ Ff.

[3752] _not_] _rot_ Porson conj. MS.

[3753] _So_] om. Pope.

[3754] First Witch.] 1. Ff. 1. 2. Capell.

[3755] _Sinel's_] _Finleg's_ Ritson conj. _Sinane's_ Beattie conj.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3756] _With ... you._] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[3757] _Into ... stayed!_] As in Capell. Three lines, ending
_corporall, ... winde ...stay'd_, in Ff.

[3758] _on_] _of_ F4.

[3759] _Who's_] _but who is_ Hanmer.

[3760] SCENE V. Pope.

[3761] _venture_] _'venture_ Warburton.

[3762] _contend Which ... that_,] _contend.--Silenced with that which
should be thine, not his,_ Becket conj.

[3763] _should_] _would_ Pope.

[3764] _afeard_] _afraid_ F4.

[3765] _death. As_] Pope. _death; as_ Rowe. _death, as_ Ff.

[3766] _thick ... with post_] _quick as tale, Post follow'd post_ A.
Hunter.

_hail Came_] Rowe. _tale Can_ Ff. _tale, Came_ Steevens (Johnson
conj.). _bale Came_ Becket conj.

[3767] _with_] _on_ Pope.

[3768] _sent_] _not sent_ Hunter conj.

[3769] _Only ... pay thee._] _To herald thee into his sight, not pay
thee._ Steevens (1793). _Only to herald thee into his sight._ Mitford
conj.

[3770] _herald_] F4. _harrold_ F1. _herald_ F2F3.

_into his_] _to's_ or _in's_ S. Walker conj., reading _Only ... thee_
as one line.

[3771] _bade_] Theobald (ed. 2). _bad_ Ff.

[3772] _why ... robes?_] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[3773] _borrow'd_] Capell. _borrowed_ F1. _his borrowed_ F2F3F4. _his
borrow'd_ Pope.

[3774] _Whether ... know not_] As in Malone. Five lines, ending
_loose ... Norway ... helpe, ... labour'd ... not,_ in Ff. Four lines,
ending _was ... rebel ... both ... not_, in Pope.

[3775] _those of_] om. Pope.

_did_] F1 and Pope. _else did_ F2F3F4.

[3776] _that_] om. Pope.

[3777] [Aside] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3778] [To Angus. Rowe.

[3779] [To Banquo. Rowe.

[3780] _trusted_] _thrusted_ Keightley (Malone conj.).

[3781] _betray's_] F1F3F4. _betrays_ F2. _betray us_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3782] _In ... you_] As in Ff. One line in Capell.

[3783] [To Rosse and Angus. Rowe. talks with Rosse and Angus apart.
Capell.] [Aside] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3784] [Aside] Marked first by Capell.

[3785] _Cannot ... cannot_] _Can it ... can it_ Anon. conj.

_cannot be good_] _can it be good?_ Jackson conj.

[3786] _if ill ... success_,] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[3787] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3788] _unfix_] _upfix_ Warburton. _uplift_ A. Hunter.

_hair_] Rowe. _heire_ F1F2F3. _heir_ F4.

[3789] _fears_] _feats_ Theobald (Warburton). _acts_ A. Hunter.

[3790] _whose_] _where_ Collier MS.

_murder ... fantastical_] _murther's yet but fantasy_ Hanmer.

[3791] _Shakes ... not._] Arranged as in Pope. Three lines, ending
_man, ... surmise, ... not_, in Ff.

[3792] _partner's_] F1F4. _partners_ F2F3.

[3793] [Aside] Rowe. om. Ff.

_If ... me_,] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

[3794] [Aside] Johnson. om. Ff.

[3795] _Time and the hour_] _Time! on!--the hour_ Johnson conj.
_Time and the honour_ Jackson conj. _Time's sandy hour_ Bailey conj.

[3796] _Give ... time_,] Arranged as in Pope. As seven lines, ending
_favour ... forgotten ... registred, ... leafe, ... them ...
upon ... time,_ in Ff. Six lines, ending _favour:-- ... forgotten ...
register'd ... them.-- ... king ... time,_ in Knight.

[3797] _forgotten_] _forgot_ Pope.

[To Rosse and Angus. Johnson.

[3798] [To Banquo. Rowe.

[3799] _The_] _I' th'_ Steevens conj. _In the_ Keightley.

[3800] _Till ... friends_] As in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[3801] SCENE IV.] Ff. SCENE VI. Pope.

Forres. The palace.] Foris. A Room in the Palace. Capell. A Palace.
Rowe.

[3802] Duncan,] Capell. King, Ff.

Malcolm ... Lennox,] Rowe. Lenox, Malcolme, Donalbaine, Ff.

[3803] Dun.] Capell. King. Ff (and throughout).

_Is ... not_] Arranged as by Capell. The line ends at _Cawdor?_ in Ff.

_Cawdor?_] _Cawdor yet?_ Pope.

_Are_] F2 F3 F4. _Or_ F1.

[3804] _My liege, ... died_] Arranged as by Pope. Seven lines, ending
_back ... die: ... hee ... pardon, ... repentance: ... him, ...
dy'de,_ in Ff.

[3805] _owed_] _own'd_] Warburton (Johnson conj.). _had_ A. Hunter.

[3806] _worthiest_] _my most worthy_ Hanmer.

[3807] _Was_] _Is_ A. Hunter.

_thou art_] _Thou'rt_ Pope.

[3808] _That_] _The_ Jennens.

_wing_] F1. _wine_ F2 F3 F4. _wind_ Rowe.

[3809] _thou hadst_] _thou'dst_ Pope.

[3810] _mine_] _more_ Collier (Collier MS.), _mean_ Staunton conj.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[3811] _than more_] _ev'n more_ Hanmer. _nay, more_ A. Hunter.

[3812] _Your ... honour._] Arranged as in Pope. Five lines, ending
_duties: ... state, ... should, ... love ... honor,_ in Ff.

[3813] _by ... Safe toward_] _in doing nothing, Save tow'rds_ Johnson
conj.

[3814] _Safe_] _Shap'd_ Hanmer. _Fief'd_ Warburton. _Fiefs_ Warburton
conj. _Serves_ Heath conj. _Saf'd_ Malone conj.

_Safe toward your_] _Safe to ward your_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LIX.
p. 713). _Safe-toward your_ Seymour conj. _Your safeguards_ Becket conj.

_your_] _you_ Blackstone conj.

_love_] _life_ Warburton.

[3815] _nor_] _and_ Rowe.

[3816] _kinsmen_] F1. _kinsman_ F2 F3 F4.

_thanes_] _and thanes_, Hanmer.

[3817] _unaccompanied_] _accompanied_ Warburton and Johnson.

[3818] _From_] om. Pope.

_Inverness_] Pope. _Envernes_ Ff.

[3819] S. Walker would end the lines _labour, ... you._

[3820] _harbinger_] Rowe. _herbenger_ F1 F2 F3. _harbenger_ F4.

[3821] [Aside] Rowe. om. Ff.

[3822] _not light_] _no light_ Hanmer. _not night_ Warburton.

[3823] _so valiant_] _of valour_ Hanmer.

[3824] _Let's_] _let us_ Pope.

[3825] _It_,] _He_ A. Hunter.

[Flourish. Exeunt.] F3. Exeunt. F2 F3 F4.

[3826] SCENE V.] SCENE VII. Pope.

Inverness. Macbeth's castle.] An Apartment in Macbeth's Castle. Rowe.
An ... Castle at Inverness. Pope.

[3827] Enter Lady Macbeth ...] Enter Macbeths Wife alone with a Letter.
Ff. Enter Lady Macbeth alone with a Letter. Rowe. Enter Lady Macbeth,
reading. Capell.

[3828] Lady M.] Lady. Ff.

[3829] _perfectest_] Rowe (ed. 2). _perfectst_ F1 F2. _perfect'st_ F3
F4. _perfected_ Warburton.

[3830] _Whiles_] _While_ Pope.

[3831] _all-hailed_] _all-hail'd_ F1. _all hail'd_ F2 F3 F4. _all,
hail'd_ Rowe (ed. 1).

[3832] _weird_] Theobald. _weyward_ Ff. _wayward_ Rowe.

[3833] _shalt be_] _shalt be hereafter_ Upton conj.

[3834] _the dues_] _thy dues_ Capell conj.

[3835] _art_] _art now_ Seymour conj.

[3836] _do I_] _I do_ F4. I Pope.

[3837] _human_] Rowe. _humane_ Ff.

[3838] _And ... it_;] As in Pope. Three lines, ending _winne ...
cryes, ... it,_ in Ff.

[3839] _thou'ldst ... undone.'_] See note (I).

[3840] _Hie_] F4. _High_ F1 F2 F3.

[3841] _impedes thee_] _impeides thee_ F1. _thee hinders_ F2 F3 F4.

[3842] _metaphysical_] _metaphysic_ Pope.

_doth seem_] _doth seek_ Johnson conj. _do strive_ Anon. conj.

[3843] _thee crown'd_] _crown'd thee_ Warburton.

[3844] Enter a Messenger.] Enter Messenger. Ff. Enter an Attendant.
Capell.

[3845] Mess.] Att. Capell.

[3846] _He ... hoarse_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[Exit Messenger.] Ff. Exit Att. Capell.

_himself is_] _himself's not_ Warburton.

[3847] _you spirits_] _all you spirits_ Pope (Davenant's version).
_come, you spirits_ Steevens (1793). _spirits of evil_ Keightley.

[3848] _mortal_] _deadly_ A. Hunter.

[3849] _direst_] _direct_ Warburton and Johnson.

[3850] _peace_] _pace_ Johnson conj.

[3851] _The effect and it_] _The effecting it_ Becket conj.

_effect_] _essect_ F2.

_it_] F3 F4. _hit_ F1 F2.

[3852] _for gall_] _with gall_ Keightley.

[3853] _blanket_] Ff. _blank height_ Coleridge conj. _blankness_
Collier MS. _blackness_ Bailey conj. _blankest_ Jessopp conj. _blonket_
Anon. (N. and Q.) conj.

[3854] [Embracing him. Rowe.

[3855] _present_] _present time_ Pope.

_feel_] _feel e'en_ Hunter conj. _feel me_ Anon. conj.

[3856] _My_] om. Pope.

[3857] _sun_] _his sun_ Jackson conj.

[3858] _a_] om. F2.

[3859] _matters. To ... time_,] Theobald. _matters, to ... time._ Ff.

[3860] _to fear_] _and fear_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3861] SCENE VI.] SCENE VIII. Pope. SCENE IV. Rowe (ed. 1).

Before....] The Castle Gate. Rowe. Before Macbeth's Castle Gate.
Theobald.

[3862] Hautboys and torches.] Hoboyes, and Torches. Ff (Hoboys, F4).
Hautboys. Servants of Macbeth with Torches. Capell.

Enter Duncan....] Enter King.... Ff.

[3863] _seat_] _site_ Johnson conj.

[3864] _the air ... itself_] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[3865] _Unto ... senses_] _Gentle unto our sense_ Becket conj.

_gentle senses_] _general sense_ Warburton. _gentle sense_ Capell
(Johnson conj.).

[3866] _martlet_] Rowe. _Barlet_ Ff.

[3867] _loved mansionry_] _love-mansionry_ Staunton conj.

_mansionry_] Theobald. _mansonry_ Ff. _masonry_ Pope (ed. 2).

_the_] om. Pope.

[3868] _Smells ... delicate_] Steevens (1793) ends the lines
_buttress, ... made ... they ... air ... delicate._

[3869] _wooingly_] _sweet and wooingly_ Hanmer.

_wooingly here: no_] _wooingly. Here is no_ Johnson conj. (withdrawn).

_jutty, frieze_] Steevens (1793). _jutty frieze_ Ff. _jutting frieze_
Pope. _jutty_, (word omitted) _frieze_ S. Walker conj.

[3870] _bird_] _bird on't_ Keightley.

[3871] _cradle: ... haunt_,] Rowe. _cradle, ... haunt_: Ff.

[3872] _most_] Rowe. _must_ Ff. _much_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[3873] Enter Lady Macbeth.] Enter Lady. Ff (and passim).

_See, see_,] _See!_ Hanmer.

[3874] _sometime is_] _sometime's_ Pope (ed. 1). _sometimes_ Pope (ed.
2). _sometimes is_ Theobald.

[3875] _you How you_] _you:--How?--You_ Jackson conj.

[3876] _shall_] _should_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_God'ild_] _God-eyld_ Ff. _Godild_ Hanmer. _God-yeld_ Warburton.
_god-yield_ Johnson. _God shield_ Johnson conj.

[3877] _Against ... hermits_] As in Pope. In Ff the first three lines
end _broad, ... house: ... dignities_.

[3878] _hermits_] F3 F4. _Ermites_ F1. _Hermites_ F2.

[3879] _as_] _at_ F2.

[3880] _To his_] _To's_ Pope.

[3881] _theirs, in compt_,] _theirs, in compt_ Pope. _theirs in
compt_, Ff.

[3882] _host: we_] _host, we_ F3 F4. _host we_ F1 F2.

[3883] [kisses her. Nicholson conj.

[3884] SCENE VII.] SCENE IX. Pope.

Macbeth's castle.] An Apartment. Rowe. An Apartment in Macbeth's
Castle. Theobald.

[3885] Hautboys and torches.] Ho-boyes. Torches. F1 F2. Ho boyes.
Torches. F3. Hoboys. Torches. F4.

Enter ... and pass over....] Enter ... over.... Ff.

a Sewer, and] om. Rowe.

[3886] _well It ... quickly: if_] _well, It ... quickly: If_ Ff.
_well. It ... quickly. If_ Anon, apud Johnson conj. _well. It ...
quickly if_ Grant White (Anon. conj. N. and Q.).

[3887] _assassination_] _assassinator_ Becket conj.

[3888] _his_] _its_ Pope.

_surcease, success_] _success, surcease_ A. Hunter (Johnson conj.).

[3889] _be ... end-all_] _be the all, and be the end of all--_Rowe
(ed. 2).

_be-all_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

_end-all_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

_end-all here_,] Hanmer. _end all. Heere,_ Ff (_Here_ F3 F4). _end
all--Here_, Rowe (ed. 1). _end-all--Here._ Warburton.

[3890] _But here, upon_] _Here only on_ Pope.

_shoal_ Theobald. _schoole_ F1 F2. _school_ F3 F4. _shelve_ Warburton.
_school'd_ Becket conj.

_time_,] _time--_ Rowe.

[3891] _instructions_] _inductions_ Becket conj.

[3892] _the inventor ... Commends_] F1. Omitted in F2 F3 F4 and Rowe.

[3893] _this_] om. Pope. _thus_, Collier, ed. 2 (Mason conj.).

[3894] _Commends_] _Returns_ Pope. _ingredients_] Pope. _ingredience_
Ff.

[3895] _his_] F1. _this_ F2 F3 F4.

_faculties_] F1 F2. _faculty_ F3 F4.

[3896] _against_] _again_ Johnson.

[3897] _cherubin_] Ff. _cherubim_ Jennens.

[3898] _couriers_] Pope. _Curriors_ Ff. _curriers_ Rowe. _coursers_
Theobald (Warburton).

[3899] _itself_] _its sell_ Singleton conj. _its seat_ Bailey conj.

[3900] _on the other._] _on th' other._ Ff. _on th' other--_ Rowe.
_on th' other side._ Hanmer. _upon the other._ Steevens conj. _on the
rider._ Mason conj. _on theory._ Jackson conj. _on th' earth._ or
_upon th' earth._ Bailey conj. _on the other bank._ Anon. conj.

[3901] SCENE X. Pope.

[3902] _He has_] _He's_ Pope. _He hath_ Hanmer.

[3903] _Know you not he has?_] _Know you not? he has._ Capell conj.

[3904] _sorts_] _sort_ Theobald.

[3905] _would_] _should_ Pope.

[3906] _dress'd_] _bless'd_ Bailey conj.

[3907] _did_] _bid_ Becket conj. _eyed_ Bailey conj.

_time_] After this Keightley marks a line omitted.

[3908] _love_] _liver_ Bailey conj.

_afeard_] _affear'd_ F1 F2 F3. _afraid_ F4.

[3909] _have ... And_] _leave ... And_ or _have ... Or_ Johnson conj.
_crave ... And_ Becket conj. _lack ... And_ Anon. conj.

[3910] _adage?_] Capell. _adage._ Ff.

[3911] _Who ... none._] Given to Lady M., reading _no_, Hunter conj.

_do_] Rowe and Southern MS. _no_ Ff.

_beast was't_] _boast was't_ Collier MS. _baseness was't_ Bailey conj.
_was it_ Hunter conj.

[3912] _the_] _than_ Hanmer.

[3913] _adhere_] _co-here_ Pope.

[3914] _They have_] _They've_ Pope.

[3915] _And ... this._] As in Steevens (1793). In Ff the first line
ends at _sworne_.

[3916] _brains_] _branes_ F2.

_out_] _on't out_ S. Walker conj.

_so_] F1 _but so_ F2F3F4. om. Seymour conj.

[3917] _fail?_] _fail?--_ Rowe. _fail,--_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_fail!_] Rowe. _faile?_ F1F2 _fail?_ F3F4. _fail._ Capell.

[3918] _his_] _this_ Pope.

[3919] _convince_] _confound_ A. Hunter.

[3920] _lie_] _lyes_ F1.

[3921] _mettle_] _metal_ F4.

[3922] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3923] _Away ... know._] Given to Lady M., Hunter conj.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _Inverness. Court of Macbeth's Castle._[3924]

   _Enter_ BANQUO, _and_ FLEANCE _bearing a torch before him_.[3925]

    _Ban._ How goes the night, boy?

    _Fle._ The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.[3926]

    _Ban._ And she goes down at twelve.

    _Fle._                              I take't, 'tis later, sir.

    _Ban._ Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven,[3927]
    Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.                     5
    A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
    And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,[3928]
    Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature[3928]
    Gives way to in repose![3928][3929]

         _Enter_ MACBETH, _and a_ Servant _with a torch_.[3930]

                            Give me my sword.
    Who's there?[3929]                                                10

    _Macb._ A friend.

    _Ban._ What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed:
    He hath been in unusual pleasure, and[3931]
    Sent forth great largess to your offices:[3931]
    This diamond he greets your wife withal,                          15
    By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up[3932][3933]
    In measureless content.[3932]

    _Macb._                 Being unprepared,
    Our will became the servant to defect,
    Which else should free have wrought.

    _Ban._                               All's well.[3934]
    I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:[3935]             20
    To you they have show'd some truth.[3936]

    _Macb._                             I think not of them:
    Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
    We would spend it in some words upon that business,[3937]
    If you would grant the time.

    _Ban._                       At your kind'st leisure.[3938]

    _Macb._ If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis[3939][3940]  25
    It shall make honour for you.[3940]

    _Ban._                       So I lose none
    In seeking to augment it, but still keep
    My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
    I shall be counsell'd.

    _Macb._                Good repose the while!

    _Ban._ Thanks, sir: the like to you![3941]                        30

                                     [_Exeunt Banquo and Fleance._[3942]

    _Macb._ Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
    She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.      [_Exit Servant._[3943]
    Is this a dagger which I see before me,
    The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
    I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.                        35
    Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
    To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
    A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
    Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
    I see thee yet, in form as palpable                               40
    As this which now I draw.[3944][3945]
    Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going;[3944][3945]
    And such an instrument I was to use.[3944][3945]
    Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,[3945]
    Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;[3945]               45
    And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,[3946]
    Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
    It is the bloody business which informs
    Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one half-world[3947]
    Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse                        50
    The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates[3948]
    Pale Hecate's offerings; and wither'd murder,[3949]
    Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
    Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,[3950]
    With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design[3951]        55
    Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,[3952]
    Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear[3953]
    Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,[3954]
    And take the present horror from the time,[3955]
    Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives:[3955][3956]   60
    Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.[3957]

                                                        [_A bell rings._

    I go, and it is done: the bell invites me.
    Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
    That summons thee to heaven, or to hell.                    [_Exit._


SCENE II. _The same._[3958]

                         _Enter_ LADY MACBETH.

    _Lady M._ That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold;
    What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace![3959]
    It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,[3959]
    Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it:[3959]
    The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms[3959]                 5
    Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their
        possets,[3959][3960]
    That death and nature do contend about them,
    Whether they live or die.

    _Macb._ [_Within_] Who's there? what, ho![3961]

    _Lady M._ Alack, I am afraid they have awaked
    And 'tis not done: the attempt and not the deed[3962]             10
    Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready;
    He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled[3963]
    My father as he slept, I had done 't.[3964]

                            _Enter_ MACBETH.

                                          My husband!

    _Macb._ I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?[3965]

    _Lady M._ I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.            15
    Did not you speak?[3966]

    _Macb._            When?

    _Lady M._                Now.

    _Macb._                       As I descended?

    _Lady M._ Ay.

    _Macb._ Hark![3967]
    Who lies i' the second chamber?[3967]

    _Lady M._                       Donalbain.

    _Macb._ This is a sorry sight.      [_Looking on his hands._[3968]  20

    _Lady M._ A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

    _Macb._ There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried
        'Murder!'[3969][3970]
    That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them:[3969][3971]
    But they did say their prayers, and address'd them[3969][3972]
    Again to sleep.[3969]

    _Lady M._      There are two lodged together.[3969]               25

    _Macb._ One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other,
    As they had seen me with these hangman's hands:[3973]
    Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,'[3973][3974]
    When they did say 'God bless us!'[3975]

    _Lady M._ Consider it not so deeply.                              30

    _Macb._ But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'?
    I had most need of blessing, and 'Amen'[3976]
    Stuck in my throat.[3976]

    _Lady M._           These deeds must not be thought[3977][3978]
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.[3977]

    _Macb._ Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more![3979]       35
    Macbeth does murder sleep'--the innocent sleep,[3979][3980]
    Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleave of care,[3981]
    The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath,[3982]
    Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,[3983]
    Chief nourisher in life's feast,--

    _Lady M._                          What do you mean?[3984]        40

    _Macb._ Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house:
    'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor[3985][3986]
    Shall sleep no more: Macbeth shall sleep no more.'[3985]

    _Lady M._ Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
    You do unbend your noble strength, to think                       45
    So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,
    And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
    Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
    They must lie there: go carry them, and smear
    The sleepy grooms with blood.

    _Macb._                       I'll go no more:                    50
    I am afraid to think what I have done;[3987]
    Look on 't again I dare not.

    _Lady M._                    Infirm of purpose!
    Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead
    Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood
    That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,[3988]                 55
    I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,[3989]
    For it must seem their guilt.      [_Exit. Knocking within._[3990]

    _Macb._                       Whence is that knocking?
    How is't with me, when every noise appals me?[3991]
    What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes!
    Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood                    60
    Clean from my hand? No; this my hand will rather
    The multitudinous seas incarnadine,[3992][3993]
    Making the green one red.[3992][3994]

                     _Re-enter_ LADY MACBETH.[3995]

    _Lady M._ My hands are of your colour, but I shame
    To wear a heart so white. [_Knocking within_] I hear a
        knocking[3996][3997]                                          65
    At the south entry: retire we to our chamber:[3997]
    A little water clears us of this deed:[3997]
    How easy is it then! Your constancy[3997]
    Hath left you unattended. [_Knocking within_] Hark! more
        knocking:[3996][3997]
    Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us                      70
    And show us to be watchers: be not lost
    So poorly in your thoughts.

    _Macb._ To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.[3996][3998][3999]

                                                     [_Knocking within._

    Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst![3998][4000]

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _The same._[4001]

                  _Enter a_ Porter. _Knocking within._

    _Porter._ Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter[4002][4003]
    of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.
        [_Knocking[4002][4003][4004][4005]_
    _within_] Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of[4002][4003]
    Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged himself on th'
        expectation[4002][4003][4006]
    of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about[4002][4003][4007]  5
    you; here you'll sweat for't. [_Knocking within._]
        Knock,[4002][4003][4004][4008]
    knock! Who's there, in th' other devil's name? Faith,[4002][4003][4009]
    here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales[4002][4003]
    against either scale; who committed treason enough
        for[4002][4003][4010]
    God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come[4002][4003]  10
    in, equivocator. [_Knocking within._] Knock, knock,
        knock![4002][4003][4004]
    Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither,[4002][4003]
    for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here
        you[4002][4003]
    may roast your goose. [_Knocking within._] Knock,
        knock;[4002][4003][4004]
    never at quiet! What are you? But this place is too
        cold[4002][4003]                                              15
    for hell. I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to[4002][4003]
    have let in some of all professions, that go the primrose[4002][4003]
    way to the everlasting bonfire. [_Knocking within._]
        Anon,[4002][4003][4004][4011]
    anon! I pray you, remember the porter.

                                          [_Opens the gate._[4002][4003]

                     _Enter_ MACDUFF _and_ LENNOX.

    _Macd._ Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,[4002]        20
    That you do lie so late?[4002]

    _Port._ Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock:[4002][4012]
    and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.[4002][4012][4013]

    _Macd._ What three things does drink especially provoke?[4002]

    _Port._ Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep and urine. Lechery,[4002]  25
    sir, it provokes and unprovokes; it provokes the desire,[4002]
    but it takes away the performance: therefore much drink[4002]
    may be said to be an equivocator with lechery: it makes[4002]
    him and it mars him; it sets him on and it takes him off;[4002]
    it persuades him and disheartens him; makes him stand[4002]       30
    to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a[4002][4014]
    sleep, and giving him the lie, leaves him.[4002][4014]

    _Macd._ I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.[4002]

    _Port._ That it did, sir, i' the very throat on me: but I[4002][4015]
    requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too strong for[4002]  35
    him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a[4002][4016]
    shift to cast him.[4002]

    _Macd._ Is thy master stirring?

                         _Enter_ MACBETH.[4017]

    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.

    _Len._ Good morrow, noble sir.

    _Macb._                         Good morrow, both.                40

    _Macd._ Is the king stirring, worthy thane?

    _Macb._                                      Not yet.

    _Macd._ He did command me to call timely on him:
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.[4018]

    _Macb._                         I'll bring you to him.

    _Macd._ I know this is a joyful trouble to you;
    But yet 'tis one.                                                 45

    _Macb._ The labour we delight in physics pain.[4019]
    This is the door.[4020]

    _Macd._           I'll make so bold to call,[4021]
    For 'tis my limited service.[4021][4022]          [_Exit._

    _Len._ Goes the king hence to-day?[4023]

    _Macb._                             He does: he did appoint so.

    _Len._ The night has been unruly: where we lay,[4024]             50
    Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,[4024]
    Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,[4024]
    And prophesying with accents terrible[4025][4026]
    Of dire combustion and confused events[4026][4027][4028]
    New hatch'd to the woful time: the obscure
        bird[4026][4028][4029][4030]                                  55
    Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth[4029]
    Was feverous and did shake.[4029]

    _Macb._                     Twas a rough night.

    _Len._ My young remembrance cannot parallel
    A fellow to it.

                       _Re-enter_ MACDUFF.[4031]

    _Macd._ O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart[4032][4033]    60
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.[4032]

    _Macb._  }
    _Len._   }                     What's the matter?

    _Macd._ Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
    Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
    The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
    The life o' the building.

    _Macb._                   What is't you say? the life?            65

    _Len._ Mean you his majesty?

    _Macd._ Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight[4034]
    With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak;
    See, and then speak yourselves.        [_Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox._
                                    Awake, awake![4035]
    Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason!                         70
    Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
    Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
    And look on death itself! up, up, and see
    The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo![4036]
    As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,               75
    To countenance this horror. Ring the bell.       [_Bell rings._[4037]

                      _Enter_ LADY MACBETH.[4038]

    _Lady M._ What's the business,
    That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley[4039]
    The sleepers of the house? speak, speak![4040]

    _Macd._                                  O gentle lady,
    'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:                        80
    The repetition, in a woman's ear,
    Would murder as it fell.

                         _Enter_ BANQUO.[4041]

                             O Banquo, Banquo![4042]
    Our royal master's murder'd.[4042]

    _Lady M._                    Woe, alas!
    What, in our house?

    _Ban._              Too cruel any where.
    Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,[4043]                   85
    And say it is not so.[4044]

             _Re-enter_ MACBETH _and_ LENNOX, _with_ ROSS.

    _Macb._ Had I but died an hour before this chance,
    I had lived a blessed time; for from this instant
    There's nothing serious in mortality:
    All is but toys: renown and grace is dead;[4045]                  90
    The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
    Is left this vault to brag of.[4046]

                    _Enter_ MALCOLM _and_ DONALBAIN.

    _Don._ What is amiss?

    _Macb._               You are, and do not know't:[4047][4048]
    The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood[4047]
    Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.                     95

    _Macd._ Your royal father's murder'd.

    _Mal._                                O, by whom?

    _Len._ Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done't:[4049]
    Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;[4050]
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows:[4051]                                        100
    They stared, and were distracted; no man's life[4051][4052]
    Was to be trusted with them.[4051]

    _Macb._ O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
    That I did kill them.[4053]

    _Macd._               Wherefore did you so?

    _Macb._ Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,[4054]    105
    Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:
    The expedition of my violent love
    Outrun the pauser reason. Here lay Duncan,[4055]
    His silver skin laced with his golden blood,[4056]
    And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature              110
    For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,
    Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers
    Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain,[4057]
    That had a heart to love, and in that heart
    Courage to make's love known?

    _Lady M._                     Help me hence, ho![4058]           115

    _Macd._ Look to the lady.[4059][4060]

    _Mal._ [_Aside to Don._] Why do we hold our tongues,[4059][4061]
    That most may claim this argument for ours?[4059]

    _Don._ [_Aside to Mal._] What should be spoken here, where our
        fate,[4059][4062]
    Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?[4059][4061][4062][4063]
    Let's away;[4062]                                                120
    Our tears are not yet brew'd.[4061]

    _Mal._      [_Aside to Don._] Nor our strong sorrow
    Upon the foot of motion.[4064]

    _Ban._                   Look to the lady:

                                         [_Lady Macbeth is carried out._

    And when we have our naked frailties hid,
    That suffer in exposure, let us meet,
    And question this most bloody piece of work,                     125
    To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us:
    In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
    Against the undivulged pretence I fight
    Of treasonous malice.

    _Macd._               And so do I.[4065]

    _All._                             So all.

    _Macb._ Let's briefly put on manly readiness,                    130
    And meet i' the hall together.[4066]

    _All._                         Well contented.

                                [_Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain._

    _Mal._ What will you do? Let's not consort with them:[4067]
    To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
    Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.[4068]

    _Don._ To Ireland, I; our separated fortune[4069]                135
    Shall keep us both the safer: where we are[4069]
    There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood,[4069][4070]
    The nearer bloody.[4069]

    _Mal._             This murderous shaft that's shot
    Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
    Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;[4071]                   140
    And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
    But shift away: there's warrant in that theft
    Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.           [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _Outside Macbeth's castle._[4072]

                    _Enter_ ROSS _with an_ old Man.

    _Old M._ Threescore and ten I can remember well:
    Within the volume of which time I have seen[4073]
    Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
    Hath trifled former knowings.

    _Ross._                       Ah, good father,[4074]
    Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,               5
    Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock 'tis day,[4075]
    And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:[4076]
    Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
    That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
    When living light should kiss it?

    _Old M._                          'Tis unnatural,[4077]           10
    Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
    A falcon towering in her pride of place
    Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.

    _Ross._ And Duncan's horses--a thing most strange and certain--[4078]
    Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,[4079]             15
    Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,[4080]
    Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make[4081]
    War with mankind.[4081][4082]

    _Old M._          'Tis said they eat each other.

    _Ross._ They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes,[4083]
    That look'd upon't.[4083]

                            _Enter_ MACDUFF.

                        Here comes the good Macduff.[4083][4084]      20
    How goes the world, sir, now?

    _Macd._                       Why, see you not?

    _Ross._ Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?

    _Macd._ Those that Macbeth hath slain.

    _Ross._                                Alas, the day!
    What good could they pretend?

    _Macd._                       They were suborn'd:[4085]
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons,                       25
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.

    _Ross._                'Gainst nature still:
    Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up[4086]
    Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like[4087]
    The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.                           30

    _Macd._ He is already named, and gone to Scone[4088]
    To be invested.

    _Ross._         Where is Duncan's body?

    _Macd._ Carried to Colme-kill,[4089]
    The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
    And guardian of their bones.

    _Ross._                      Will you to Scone?                   35

    _Macd._ No, cousin, I'll to Fife.

    _Ross._                           Well, I will thither.

    _Macd._ Well, may you see things well done there: adieu![4090]
    Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!

    _Ross._ Farewell, father.

    _Old M._ God's benison go with you, and with those[4091]          40
    That would make good of bad and friends of foes!

                                                        [_Exeunt._[4092]

FOOTNOTES:

[3924] Inverness ... castle.] The same. Court within the Castle. Capell
(Johnson conj.). A Hall. Rowe. A Hall in Macbeth's Castle. Pope.

[3925] Enter ...] Collier (substantially). Enter Banquo, and Fleance,
with a Torch before him. Ff. Enter Banquo, and Fleance; Servant with a
Torch before them. Capell.

[3926] _The moon ... clock._] _I've not ... clock: The moon is down._
Seymour conj., ending the first line at _clock._

[3927] _Hold ... heaven_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_There's_] _'Tis very dark; there's_ Seymour conj.

[3928] _And ... repose!_] As in Rowe. In Ff lines 7 and 8 end
_sleepe: ... thoughts._

[3929] _Gives ... there?_] As in Hanmer. In Ff the lines end
_repose ... there?_

[3930] Enter ...] Ff. After _sword_ in Capell. After _there?_ in Dyce.

_Give ... sword_] om. Seymour conj., reading _Gives ... friend_ as one
line.

[3931] _He ... offices_] See note (II).

[3932] _By ... content._] Arranged as in Pope. The first line ends
_hostesse_, in Ff.

[3933] _hostess_;] An omission here. Anon. conj.

_and shut up_] _And shut up_ F1. _And shut it up_ F2F3F4. _and's shut
up_ Hanmer.

[3934] _All's_] _Sir, all is_ Steevens conj.

_well_] _very well_ Hanmer.

[3935] _weird_] Theobald. _weyward_ Ff.

[3936] _they have_] _they've_ Pope.

[3937] _We would_] _Would_ Pope.

_it in_] _it_ Rowe (ed. 1). om. Rowe (ed. 2).

[3938] _kind'st_] F1. _kindst_ F2. _kind_ F3F4. _kindest_ A. Hunter.

_leisure_] See note (III)

[3939] _my consent_] _my ascent_ Capell conj. MS. _my content_ Malone
conj. _my concent_ Id. conj. (withdrawn), _me constant_ Jackson conj.
_my convent_ Becket conj. _my consort_ Grant White conj.

[3940] _when 'tis ... you._] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[3941] [Exeunt....] Theobald. Exit Banquo. Ff.

[3942] SCENE II. Pope.

[3943] [Exit Servant.] Rowe. Exit. Ff.

[3944] _As ... use._] S. Walker would end the lines _me ...
instrument ... use._

[3945] _As ... still_;] Five lines, ending _me ... instrument ...
fools ... rest ... still;_ in Keightley.

[3946] _thy blade and dudgeon_] _the blade of th' dudgeon_ Warburton.
_thy blade, vain dudgeon,_ Becket conj.

[3947] _Thus_] _This_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_the one half-world_] _one half the world_ Pope.

[3948] _sleep_] F3 F4. _sleepe_ F1 F2. _sleeper_ Rann (Steevens conj.).

_witchcraft_] _now witchcraft_ Rowe (Davenant's version). _while
witchcraft_ Nicholson conj.

[3949] _wither'd_] _with her_ Seward conj.

[3950] _howl's_] F3 F4. _howle's_ F1. _howles_ F2.

[3951] _With Tarquin's ... strides_,] Pope. _With Tarquins ... sides_,
Ff. _Tarquin's ... slides,_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LVIII. p. 766).
_With Tarquin ravishing, slides_ Johnson conj. _With ravishing
Tarquin's sides,_ Becket conj. _With Tarquin's ravishing ideas,_
Jackson conj. (_Which Tarquin's ravishing sides_) Knight conj. _Or
Tarquin's ravishing strides_ Hunter conj. _With ravishing Tarquin's
strides,_ Staunton conj.

[3952] _sure_] Capell (Pope conj.). _sowre_ F1 F2. _sowr_ F3. _sour_
F4. _sound_ Pope.

_sure and_] _sovrand_ Becket conj.

[3953] _Hear_] _Heed_ Becket conj.

_which way they_] Rowe. _which they may_ Ff. _where they may_ Barry
conj.

_walk, for_] _walk. For_ Becket conj.

[3954] _Thy_] _The_ A. Hunter.

_of my whereabout_] _of that we're about_ Hanmer. _of me: veer
about_ or _of me: wheel about_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LVIII. p. 766).

[3955] _And take ... Which_] _And talk--The present horrour of the
time! That_ Johnson conj.

[3956] _Whiles_] _Whilst_ Rowe. _While_ Capell.

[3957] _Words ... gives._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[3958] SCENE II.] SCENE III. Pope. Theobald continues the scene.

The same.] Capell.

[3959] _What ... possets_,] Arranged as in Rowe. In Ff the lines end
_fire ... shriek'd, ... night ... open: ... charge ... possets_.

[3960] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[3961] Macb. [Within] Steevens. Enter Macbeth. Macb. Ff.

[3962] _attempt and ... deed_] Edd., Globe ed. (Hunter conj.).
_attempt, and ... deed,_ Ff.

[3963] _'em_] _them_ Capell.

[3964] Enter Macbeth.] Steevens (1793). Re-enter Macbeth. Dyce, after
_husband!_

_My husband!_ As in Rowe. A separate line in Ff.

[3965] _I ... noise?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[3966] _Did ... descended?_] Macb. _Did ... speak?_ Lady M. _When?
Now?_ Macb. _As ... descended._ Hunter conj.

[3967] _Hark!... chamber?_] Arranged as by Steevens (1793). One line in
Ff.

[3968] [Looking....] Looks.... Pope. om. Ff.

[3969] _There's ... sleep._] Arranged as by Rowe. The lines end
_sleepe, ... other: ... prayers, ... sleepe,_ in Ff.

[3970] _in's_] _in his_ Capell.

[3971] _That ... I_] _They wak'd each other; and I_ Pope.

[3972] _address'd_] _address_ Theobald.

[3973] _hands: ... fear_,] Pointed as in Ff. _hands, ... fear_; Rowe.

[3974] _fear_] _prayer_ Anon. conj.

[3975] _did say_] om. Steevens conj.

[3976] _I had ... throat._] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[3977] _These ... ways_;] As in Ff. One line in Rowe.

[3978] _thought_] _thought on_ Hanmer.

[3979] _'Sleep ... sleep'_] See note (IV).

[3980] _does_] _doth_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3981] _Sleep ... care_,] Put in the margin by Pope.

_sleave_] Steevens (Seward conj.). _sleeve_ Ff.

[3982] _death_] _birth_ Warburton. _breath_ Becket conj.

_life_] _grief_ Jennens conj.

[3983] _course_] _source_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[3984] _feast,--_] _feast.--_ Theobald. _feast._ Ff.

[3985] _'Glamis ... more.'_] See note (IV).

[3986] _Glamis_] _For Glamis_ Seymour conj.

[3987] _what_] _on what_ Keightley.

[3988] _do_] om. Pope.

[3989] _gild_] F3 F4. _guild_ F1. _guilde_ F2.

[3990] [Knocking....] Knocke.... Ff. Knocks.... Rowe (ed. 2).

_knocking?_] _knocking?_ [Starting. Rowe.

[3991] _is't_] _is it_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3992] _The ... red_] _Make the green ocean red--_ Pope, putting _Thy
multitudinous sea incarnadine_ in the margin.

[3993] _The_] _Thy_ Theobald, after Pope's margin.

_seas_] _sear_ F4. _sea_ Rowe.

_incarnadine_] Rowe. _incarnardine_ Ff.

[3994] _green one red._] _Green one Red._ F4. _Greene one, Red_ F1 F2
F3. _green, One red--_ Johnson. _green--one red._ Steevens, 1778
(Murphy conj.).

[3995] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter Lady. Ff.

[3996] [Knocking within.] Dyce. Knocke. Ff. Knocking without. Staunton.

[3997] _To ... knocking_:] Arranged as in Pope. Seven lines, ending
_white ... entry: ... chamber: ... deed ... constancie
unattended ... knocking,_ in Ff.

[3998] _To ... couldst!_] Two lines in Pope. Four in Ff.

[3999] _To know_] _T' unknow_ Hanmer.

[Knocking....] Knocke. Ff. om. Pope.

[4000] _Wake ... thy_] _Wake Duncan with this_ Rowe. _Wake, Duncan,
with this_ Theobald (Davenant's version).

_I would_] _would_ Pope. _Ay, 'would_ Steevens (1793).

[4001] SCENE III.] Scene continued in Rowe. SCENE IV. Warburton,
following Pope's margin. SCENE II. Staunton.

The same.] Capell.

[4002] Porter. _Here's ... cast him._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[4003] Blank verse, Maginn conj.

[4004] [Knocking within.] Knock. Ff.

[4005] _he should have old_] _he could not have more_ A. Hunter.

[4006] _on_] _in_ Pope. _upon_ Maginn conj.

[4007] _come in time_] _come in, Time_ Staunton. _come in, farmer_
Anon. conj.

_enow_] F1. _enough_ F2 F3 F4.

[4008] _you'll_] _you will_ Rann.

[4009] _in th'_] _i'th'_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_Faith_] _I' faith_ Maginn conj.

[4010] _who_] _one who_ Maginn conj.

[4011] _bonfire_] _darkness._ So quoted by Maginn.

[4012] _Faith ... things._] Prose first by Johnson. Two lines in Ff.

[4013] _of three things ... cast him._] _of sleep._ A. Hunter.

[4014] _in a sleep_] _into a sleep_ Rowe. _into sleep_ Mason conj.
_asleep_ Collier MS.

[4015] _on me_] _o' me_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[4016] _up_] om. Warburton.

[4017] SCENE IV. Pope.

Enter M.] Collier. After line 37 in Ff. After _noble sir_, line 40, in
Pope. After line 39 in Capell. Re-enter M. Dyce, after line 39.

[4018] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4019] _physics_] _Physicks_ F1 F2. _Physick's_ F3 F4.

[4020] _This_] _That_ Capell (MS. correction).

[4021] _I'll ... service._] As verse first by Hanmer. Prose in Ff.

[4022] [Exit.] Capell. Exit Macduffe. Ff.

[4023] _hence_] _From hence_ Steevens (1793), reading _For ... king
From ... so_, as two lines.

_He does_:] om. Pope.

[4024] _The ... death_,] As in Rowe. Four lines, ending _unruly: ...
downe, ... ayre ... Death_, in Ff.

[4025] _And prophesying_] _And prophesyings_ Hanmer. _Aunts
prophesying_ Warburton conj.

[4026] _And ... time: the_] _And ... time. The_ Ff. _And, ... time,
the_ Knight (Anon. conj.).

[4027] _combustion_] F1. _combustions_ F2 F3 F4.

[4028] _events New ... time: the_] _events, New ... time. The_ Ff.
_events. New ... time, the_ Johnson conj.

[4029] _New ... shake._] Arranged as in Hanmer. Four lines, ending
_time ... Night ... fevorous ... shake_, in Ff. Three in Rowe, ending
_time ... night, ... shake_.

[4030] _obscure_] _obscene_ S. Walker conj.

[4031] Re-enter M.] Re-enter M., hastily. Capell. Enter M. Ff.

[4032] _Tongue ... thee._] As in Capell. One line in Ff.

[4033] _Tongue nor_] _Or tongue or_ Pope. _Nor tongue, nor_ Theobald.

[4034] Macd.] F1. Macb. F2 F3 F4.

[4035] [Exeunt ...] Ff, after _awake, awake._

[4036] _Banquo!_] _Donalbain!_ Hanmer. _Banquo! rise!_ Johnson conj.

[4037] _Ring the bell._ [Bell rings.] Ff. Bell rings. Theobald,
omitting _Ring the bell_.

[Bell rings.] Alarum-bell rings. Dyce.

Enter ...] Re-enter ... Dyce.

[4038] SCENE V. Pope.

[4039] _a_] _an_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4040] _speak, speak!_] _speak._ Pope.

_O_] om. Pope.

[4041] Enter Banquo.] Enter Banquo, and Others. Capell. Re-enter
Banquo. Dyce.

[4042] _O ... murder'd._] As in Theobald. One line in Ff.

[4043] _Dear Duff_] _Macduff_ Pope.

_contradict_] _contract_ F2 F3 F4.

[4044] Re-enter ...] Enter Macbeth, Lenox, and Rosse. Ff. Re-enter
Macbeth, and Lenox. Capell.

[4045] _is dead_] _are dead_ Hanmer.

[4046] _Is_] _Are_ Hanmer.

[4047] _You are ... head_,] _You are, and do not know it, The spring,
the head:_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LIX. p. 810).

[4048] _know't_] _know it_ Steevens.

[4049] _seem'd, had_] _seems, have_ A. Hunter.

[4050] _badged_] _bath'd_ Malone conj. (withdrawn).

[4051] _Upon ... them._] As in Steevens (1793). Two lines, the first
ending _distracted_, in Ff.

[4052] _no_] _As no_ Hanmer, reading _As ... them_ as one line.

[4053] _them._] _them--_ Rowe.

[4054] _amazed_] _and maz'd_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LIX. p. 35).

[4055] _Outrun_] _Outran_ Johnson.

[4056] _His ... blood_] _His snow-white skin streaked with his
crimson blood_ A. Hunter.

_laced_] _laqu'd_ Warburton conj.

_golden_] _goary_ Pope.

[4057] _Unmannerly breech'd_] _Unmanly reech'd_ Warburton. _Unmanly
drench'd_ Johnson. _Unmannerly hatch'd_ Seward conj. _In a manner
lay drench'd_ Heath conj.

[4058] _make's_] _make his_ Capell.

[Seeming to faint. Rowe.

[4059] _Look ... us?_] S. Walker would end the lines _lady ...
claim ... spoken ... hole, ... us?_

[4060] [gather about her. Capell.

[4061] [Aside ...] Staunton. om. Ff.

[4062] _What ... away_] As in Dyce. Three lines, ending _here, ...
hole, ... away,_ in Ff. Malone ends the lines at
_spoken ... hole ...tears._ Knight ends them at _here ... hole ...
tears._

[4063] _Hid in_] _hid in_ F1. _hid within_ F2 F3 F4. _hidden in_
Jackson conj.

[4064] _Upon_] _on_ Pope, reading _Are ... on_ as one line.

_Look_] _Look there_ Hanmer.

[Lady ...] Rowe. om. Ff.

[4065] Macd.] Macb. Rowe.

_And_] om. Pope.

[4066] [Exeunt all but ...] Hanmer. Exeunt. Ff.

[4067] _What ... them_:] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4068] _Which ... England._] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4069] _To ... bloody._] As in Rowe. Four lines in Ff, ending _I ...
safer: ... smiles; ... bloody._

[4070] _near_] _near'_ Delius.

[4071] _horse_] F1. _house_ F2 F3 F4.

[4072] SCENE IV.] SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE VI. Pope.

Outside ...] The outside of Macbeth's Castle. Theobald.

[4073] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4074] _Ah_] Rowe. _Ha_ Ff.

[4075] _Threaten_] Rowe. _Threatens_ Ff.

_his_] _this_ Theobald.

_stage_] _strage_ Warburton conj. (withdrawn).

[4076] _travelling_] F3 F4. _travailing_ F1 F2.

[4077] _should_] _shall_ F2.

[4078] _And ... certain_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_horses_] _horse_ S. Walker conj.

[4079] _their_] _the_ Theobald.

[4080] _flung_] F3 F4. _flong_ F1 F2.

[4081] _would make War_] Divided as in Steevens (1793). The first line
ends _would_ in Ff.

[4082] _mankind_] _man_ Pope.

_eat_] _ate_ Keightley.

[4083] _They ... Macduff._] As in Pope. Three lines, ending _so: ...
upon't ... Macduffe,_ in Ff.

[4084] Enter Macduff.] As in Ff. After the line in Johnson.

[4085] _were_] _are_ Theobald (ed. 1).

_suborn'd_] Rowe. _subborned_ F1 F2. _suborned_ F3 F4.

[4086] _wilt_] Warburton. _will_ Ff.

_ravin up_] Theobald, _raven up_ F1. _raven upon_ F2 F3 F4.

[4087] _Thine_] _Its_ Hanmer.

_life's_] Pope. _lives_ Ff.

_Then 'tis_] _Why then it is_ Hanmer.

[4088] _gone_] _gons_ F2.

[4089] _Colme-kill_] _Colmeshill_ Rowe. _Colmes-kill_ Johnson.

[4090] _Well, may_] Theobald. _Well may_ Ff.

[4091] _you_] F1. _you sir_ F2. _you, sir_ F3 F4.

[4092] [Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Ff.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _Forres. The palace._[4093]

                            _Enter_ BANQUO.

    _Ban._ Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all,[4094]
    As the weird women promised, and I fear[4095]
    Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said[4096]
    It should not stand in thy posterity,
    But that myself should be the root and father                      5
    Of many kings. If there come truth from them--
    As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine--[4097]
    Why, by the verities on thee made good,
    May they not be my oracles as well
    And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.[4098]                   10

     _Sennet sounded. Enter_ MACBETH, _as king_; LADY MACBETH, _as_
     _queen_; LENNOX, ROSS, Lords, Ladies, _and_ Attendants.[4099]

    _Macb._ Here's our chief guest.

    _Lady M._                       If he had been forgotten,
    It had been as a gap in our great feast,
    And all-thing unbecoming.[4100]

    _Macb._ To-night we hold a solemn supper, sir,
    And I'll request your presence.

    _Ban._                          Let your highness[4101]           15
    Command upon me, to the which my duties[4102]
    Are with a most indissoluble tie
    For ever knit.

    _Macb._ Ride you this afternoon?

    _Ban._                           Ay, my good lord.

    _Macb._ We should have else desired your good advice,[4103]       20
    Which still hath been both grave and prosperous,[4103]
    In this day's council; but we'll take to-morrow.[4103][4104]
    Is't far you ride?[4103][4105]

    _Ban._ As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
    'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,               25
    I must become a borrower of the night
    For a dark hour or twain.

    _Macb._                     Fail not our feast.

    _Ban._ My lord, I will not.

    _Macb._ We hear our bloody cousins are bestow'd
    In England and in Ireland, not confessing                         30
    Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
    With strange invention: but of that to-morrow,
    When therewithal we shall have cause of state
    Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,[4106][4107]
    Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?[4107]            35

    _Ban._ Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.[4108]

    _Macb._ I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
    And so I do commend you to their backs.
    Farewell.                                            [_Exit Banquo._
    Let every man be master of his time                               40
    Till seven at night; to make society[4109]
    The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself[4109][4110]
    Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you![4110][4111]

                             [_Exeunt all but Macbeth and an Attendant._

    Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men[4112][4113]
    Our pleasure?[4113]                                               45

    _Attend._ They are, my lord, without the palace-gate.[4113]

    _Macb._ Bring them before us.             [_Exit Attendant._[4114]
                                  To be thus is nothing;[4115][4116]
    But to be safely thus: our fears in Banquo[4116][4116]
    Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature[4116]
    Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares,[4116]      50
    And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
    He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
    To act in safety. There is none but he
    Whose being I do fear: and under him
    My Genius is rebuked, as it is said[4117]                         55
    Mark Antony's was by CÃ¦sar. He chid the sisters,[4117][4118]
    When first they put the name of king upon me,
    And bade them speak to him; then prophet-like[4119]
    They hail'd him father to a line of kings:
    Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown                        60
    And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
    Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,[4120]
    No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,[4121]
    For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind;[4122][4123]
    For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd;[4123]               65
    Put rancours in the vessel of my peace[4123]
    Only for them, and mine eternal jewel[4123]
    Given to the common enemy of man,[4123]
    To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings![4123][4124]
    Rather than so, come, fate, into the list,                        70
    And champion me to the utterance! Who's there?[4125]

              _Re-enter_ Attendant, _with two_ Murderers.

    Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.[4126]

                                                      [_Exit Attendant._

    Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

    _First Mur._ It was, so please your highness.[4127]

    _Macb._                                       Well then, now[4128]
    Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know[4128][4129][4130]        75
    That it was he in the times past which held you[4130]
    So under fortune, which you thought had been[4130]
    Our innocent self: this I made good to you[4130]
    In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you,[4130][4131]
    How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments,[4130]   80
    Who wrought with them, and all things else that might[4130]
    To half a soul and to a notion crazed
    Say 'Thus did Banquo.'

    _First Mur._           You made it known to us.[4132]

    _Macb._ I did so; and went further, which is now[4133]
    Our point of second meeting. Do you find[4133]                    85
    Your patience so predominant in your nature,[4133]
    That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd,[4133]
    To pray for this good man and for his issue,[4133]
    Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave[4133]
    And beggar'd yours for ever?[4133]

    _First Mur._                 We are men, my liege.[4133]          90

    _Macb._ Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men;
    As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
    Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept[4134]
    All by the name of dogs: the valued file
    Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,                    95
    The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
    According to the gift which bounteous nature
    Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
    Particular addition, from the bill[4135]
    That writes them all alike: and so of men.                       100
    Now if you have a station in the file,
    Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say it,[4136]
    And I will put that business in your bosoms[4137]
    Whose execution takes your enemy off,
    Grapples you to the heart and love of us,                        105
    Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
    Which in his death were perfect.[4138]

    _Sec. Mur._                      I am one, my liege,
    Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
    Have so incensed that I am reckless what[4139]
    I do to spite the world.[4139][4140]

    _First Mur._             And I another                           110
    So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,[4141]
    That I would set my life on any chance,
    To mend it or be rid on 't.

    _Macb._                     Both of you[4142]
    Know Banquo was your enemy.[4142]

    _Both Mur._                 True, my lord.

    _Macb._ So is he mine, and in such bloody distance               115
    That every minute of his being thrusts
    Against my near'st of life: and though I could
    With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
    And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
    For certain friends that are both his and mine,[4143]            120
    Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall[4143]
    Who I myself struck down: and thence it is[4143][4144]
    That I to your assistance do make love,
    Masking the business from the common eye
    For sundry weighty reasons.

    _Sec. Mur._                 We shall, my lord,                   125
    Perform what you command us.

    _First Mur._                 Though our lives--

    _Macb._ Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most[4145]
    I will advise you where to plant yourselves,[4146]
    Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,[4147]
    The moment on 't; for 't must be done to-night,                  130
    And something from the palace; always thought[4148][4149]
    That I require a clearness: and with him--[4149]
    To leave no rubs nor botches in the work--
    Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
    Whose absence is no less material to me                          135
    Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
    Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart:
    I'll come to you anon.

    _Both Mur._            We are resolved, my lord.[4150]

    _Macb._ I'll call upon you straight: abide within.

                                              [_Exeunt Murderers._[4151]

    It is concluded: Banquo, thy soul's flight,                      140
    If it find heaven, must find it out to-night.          [_Exit._[4152]


SCENE II. _The palace._[4153]

              _Enter_ LADY MACBETH _and a_ Servant.[4154]

    _Lady M._ Is Banquo gone from court?

    _Serv._ Ay, madam, but returns again to-night.

    _Lady M._ Say to the king, I would attend his leisure
    For a few words.

    _Serv._    Madam, I will.                                   [_Exit._

    _Lady M._                 Nought's had, all's spent,[4155]
    Where our desire is got without content:                           5
    'Tis safer to be that which we destroy[4156]
    Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

                            _Enter_ MACBETH.

    How now, my lord! why do you keep alone,[4157]
    Of sorriest fancies your companions making;[4158]
    Using those thoughts which should indeed have died                10
    With them they think on? Things without all remedy[4159]
    Should be without regard: what's done is done.

    _Macb._ We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it:[4160]
    She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice[4161]
    Remains in danger of her former tooth.                            15
    But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,[4162]
    Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
    In the affliction of these terrible dreams
    That shake us nightly: better be with the dead,
    Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,[4163]             20
    Than on the torture of the mind to lie
    In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;[4164]
    After life's fitful fever he sleeps well;
    Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,
    Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,                           25
    Can touch him further.[4165][4166]

    _Lady M._               Come on;[4165]
    Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;[4165]
    Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.[4165][4167]

    _Macb._ So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you:[4165][4168]
    Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;[4165][4168][4169]           30
    Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:[4165][4168]
    Unsafe the while, that we[4165][4168][4170]
    Must lave our honours in these flattering streams,[4168][4171]
    And make our faces visards to our hearts,[4168][4172]
    Disguising what they are.[4168]

    _Lady M._                 You must leave this.[4168]              35

    _Macb._ O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
    Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.[4173]

    _Lady M._ But in them nature's copy's not eterne.[4174]

    _Macb._ There's comfort yet; they are assailable;
    Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown                       40
    His cloister'd flight; ere to black Hecate's summons
    The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums[4175]
    Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done[4176]
    A deed of dreadful note.[4176]

    _Lady M._                What's to be done?

    _Macb._ Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,              45
    Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,[4177]
    Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
    And with thy bloody and invisible hand
    Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
    Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow[4178][4179]     50
    Makes wing to the rooky wood:[4179][4180]
    Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
    Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse.[4181]
    Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still;
    Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill:                   55
    So, prithee, go with me.                                  [_Exeunt._


SCENE III. _A park near the palace._[4182]

                        _Enter three_ Murderers.

    _First Mur._ But who did bid thee join with us?

    _Third Mur._                                    Macbeth.

    _Sec. Mur._ He needs not our mistrust; since he delivers[4183]
    Our offices, and what we have to do,
    To the direction just.[4184]

    _First Mur._           Then stand with us.[4184]
    The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day:                    5
    Now spurs the lated traveller apace[4185]
    To gain the timely inn, and near approaches[4186]
    The subject of our watch.

    _Third Mur._              Hark! I hear horses.

    _Ban._ [_Within_] Give us a light there, ho!

    _Sec. Mur._                 Then 'tis he: the rest[4187][4188][4189]
    That are within the note of expectation[4188][4189][4190]         10
    Already are i' the court.[4188][4191]

    _First Mur._       His horses go about.

    _Third Mur._ Almost a mile: but he does usually--
    So all men do--from hence to the palace gate[4192]
    Make it their walk.

    _Sec. Mur._         A light, a light![4193]

          _Enter_ BANQUO, _and_ FLEANCE _with a torch_.[4194]

    _Third Mur._                          'Tis he.[4193]

    _First Mur._ Stand to 't.[4193]                                   15

    _Ban._ It will be rain to-night.[4195]

    _First Mur._                     Let it come down.

                                                [_They set upon Banquo._

    _Ban._ O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly![4196]
    Thou mayst revenge. O slave!      [_Dies. Fleance escapes._[4197]

    _Third Mur._ Who did strike out the light?

    _First Mur._                               Was't not the way?

    _Third Mur._ There's but one down; the son is fled.

    _Sec. Mur._                                   We have lost[4198]  20
    Best half of our affair.[4199]

    _First Mur._ Well, let's away and say how much is done.[4199]

                                                             [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _Hall in the palace._[4200]

        _A banquet prepared. Enter_ MACBETH, LADY MACBETH, ROSS,
                 LENNOX, Lords, _and_ Attendants.[4201]

    _Macb._ You know your own degrees; sit down: at first[4202][4203]
    And last the hearty welcome.[4202][4204]

    _Lords._                     Thanks to your majesty.

    _Macb._ Ourself will mingle with society
    And play the humble host.
    Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time[4205]                5
    We will require her welcome.

    _Lady M._ Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
    For my heart speaks they are welcome.[4206]

                 _Enter first_ Murderer _to the door_.

    _Macb._ See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
    Both sides are even: here I'll sit i' the midst:                  10
    Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure
    The table round. [_Approaching the door_] There's blood upon thy
        face.[4207][4208]

    _Mur._ 'Tis Banquo's then.[4208]

    _Macb._ 'Tis better thee without than he within.[4208][4209]
    Is he dispatch'd?[4208]                                           15

    _Mur._ My lord, his throat is cut; that I did for him.[4208][4210]

    _Macb._ Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's
        good[4208][4211][4212]
    That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it,[4208][4211]
    Thou art the nonpareil.[4208][4211]

    _Mur._                  Most royal sir,[4208]
    Fleance is 'scaped.[4208]                                         20

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] Then comes my fit again: I had else been
        perfect,[4208][4213]
    Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,[4208]
    As broad and general as the casing air:[4208]
    But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in[4208][4214]
    To saucy doubts and fears.--But Banquo's safe?[4208]              25

    _Mur._ Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides,[4208]
    With twenty trenched gashes on his head;[4208]
    The least a death to nature.[4208]

    _Macb._                      Thanks for that.[4208]
    [_Aside_] There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's
        fled[4208][4215]
    Hath nature that in time will venom breed,[4208]                  30
    No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow[4208]
    We'll hear ourselves again.[4208][4216]      [_Exit Murderer._

    _Lady M._                   My royal lord,
    You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold[4217]
    That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a-making,[4218]
    'Tis given with welcome: to feed were best at home;[4219]         35
    From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
    Meeting were bare without it.

    _Macb._                       Sweet remembrancer!
    Now good digestion wait on appetite,
    And health on both!

    _Len._              May't please your highness sit.

       [_The Ghost of Banquo enters, and sits in Macbeth's place._[4220]

    _Macb._ Here had we now our country's honour roof'd,              40
    Were the graced person of our Banquo present;
    Who may I rather challenge for unkindness[4221]
    Than pity for mischance![4222]

    _Ross._                  His absence, sir,
    Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness[4223]
    To grace us with your royal company.[4224]                        45

    _Macb._ The table's full.

    _Len._                    Here is a place reserved, sir.[4225]

    _Macb._ Where?

    _Len._ Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your highness?[4226]

    _Macb._ Which of you have done this?

    _Lords._                             What, my good lord?

    _Macb._ Thou canst not say I did it: never shake                  50
    Thy gory locks at me.

    _Ross._ Gentlemen, rise; his highness is not well.

    _Lady M._ Sit, worthy friends: my lord is often thus,
    And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat;
    The fit is momentary; upon a thought[4227]                        55
    He will again be well: if much you note him,
    You shall offend him and extend his passion:
    Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?[4228][4229]

    _Macb._ Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that[4229]
    Which might appal the devil.[4229]

    _Lady M._                    O proper stuff![4229][4230]          60
    This is the very painting of your fear:[4229][4231]
    This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said,[4229]
    Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,[4229]
    Impostors to true fear, would well become[4229][4232]
    A woman's story at a winter's fire,[4229]                         65
    Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself![4229]
    Why do you make such faces? When all's done,[4229]
    You look but on a stool.[4229]

    _Macb._ Prithee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you?[4229][4233]
    Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.[4229]             70
    If charnel-houses and our graves must send[4229]
    Those that we bury back, our monuments[4229]
    Shall be the maws of kites.[4229]        [_Exit Ghost._[4234]

    _Lady M._                   What, quite unmann'd in folly?[4229]

    _Macb._ If I stand here, I saw him.[4229]

    _Lady M._                           Fie, for shame![4229]

    _Macb._ Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden
        time,[4229][4235]                                             75
    Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;[4229][4236]
    Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd[4229][4237]
    Too terrible for the ear: the time has been,[4229][4238]
    That, when the brains were out, the man would die,[4229]
    And there an end; but now they rise again,[4229]                  80
    With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,[4229]
    And push us from our stools: this is more strange[4229]
    Than such a murder is.[4229]

    _Lady M._               My worthy lord,
    Your noble friends do lack you.

    _Macb._                         I do forget.[4239]
    Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends;                        85
    I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
    To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;[4240]
    Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine, fill full.
    I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,[4241]
    And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss;                      90
    Would he were here! to all and him we thirst,
    And all to all.[4242]

    _Lords._        Our duties, and the pledge.[4243]

                        _Re-enter_ Ghost.[4244]

    _Macb._ Avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee!
    Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes                            95
    Which thou dost glare with.

    _Lady M._                   Think of this, good peers,
    But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other;
    Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

    _Macb._ What man dare, I dare:
    Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,                      100
    The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;[4245]
    Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
    Shall never tremble: or be alive again,[4246]
    And dare me to the desert with thy sword;
    If trembling I inhabit then, protest me[4247]                    105
    The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow![4248]
    Unreal mockery, hence!         [_Exit Ghost._[4249]
                           Why, so: being gone,
    I am a man again. Pray you, sit still.

    _Lady M._ You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,[4250]
    With most admired disorder.[4251]

    _Macb._                    Can such things be,[4251][4252]       110
    And overcome us like a summer's cloud,[4252]
    Without our special wonder? You make me strange[4252]
    Even to the disposition that I owe,[4253]
    When now I think you can behold such sights,[4254]
    And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,[4255]                  115
    When mine is blanch'd with fear.

    _Ross._                          What sights, my lord?[4256]

    _Lady M._ I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
    Question enrages him: at once, good night:
    Stand not upon the order of your going,
    But go at once.

    _Len._ Good night; and better health                             120
    Attend his majesty!

    _Lady M._          A kind good night to all![4257]

                                   [_Exeunt all but Macbeth and Lady M._

    _Macb._ It will have blood: they say blood will have blood:[4258]
    Stones have been known to move and trees to speak;[4259]
    Augures and understood relations have[4259][4260]
    By maggot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth[4261]         125
    The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?

    _Lady M._ Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

    _Macb._ How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person
    At our great bidding?

    _Lady M._             Did you send to him, sir?[4262]

    _Macb._ I hear it by the way, but I will send:[4263]             130
    There's not a one of them but in his house[4264]
    I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow,[4265][4266]
    And betimes I will, to the weird sisters:[4266][4267]
    More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know,[4268]
    By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good[4269]           135
    All causes shall give way: I am in blood
    Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,[4270]
    Returning were as tedious as go o'er:[4271]
    Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
    Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.                     140

    _Lady M._ You lack the season of all natures, sleep.[4272]

    _Macb._ Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse[4273]
    Is the initiate fear that wants hard use:
    We are yet but young in deed.[4274]        [_Exeunt._


SCENE V. _A heath._[4275]

        _Thunder. Enter the three_ Witches, _meeting_ HECATE.

    _First Witch._ Why, how now, Hecate! you look angerly.

    _Hec._ Have I not reason, beldams as you are,[4276][4277]
    Saucy and over-bold? How did you dare[4277]
    To trade and traffic with Macbeth
    In riddles and affairs of death;                                   5
    And I, the mistress of your charms,
    The close contriver of all harms,
    Was never call'd to bear my part,
    Or show the glory of our art?
    And, which is worse, all you have done                            10
    Hath been but for a wayward son,[4278]
    Spiteful and wrathful; who, as others do,[4279]
    Loves for his own ends, not for you.[4280]
    But make amends now: get you gone,
    And at the pit of Acheron                                         15
    Meet me i' the morning: thither he
    Will come to know his destiny:
    Your vessels and your spells provide,
    Your charms and every thing beside.
    I am for the air; this night I'll spend[4281]                     20
    Unto a dismal and a fatal end:[4282]
    Great business must be wrought ere noon:
    Upon the corner of the moon
    There hangs a vaporous drop profound;
    I'll catch it ere it come to ground:                              25
    And that distill'd by magic sleights[4283]
    Shall raise such artificial sprites[4284]
    As by the strength of their illusion
    Shall draw him on to his confusion:
    He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear                        30
    His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:
    And you all know security
    Is mortals' chiefest enemy.[4285]

                 [_Music and a song within_: 'Come away, come away,' &c.

    Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see,
    Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.[4286]          [_Exit._  35

    _First Witch._ Come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.[4287]

                                                             [_Exeunt._


SCENE VI. _Forres. The palace._[4288]

                _Enter_ LENNOX _and another_ Lord.[4289]

    _Len._ My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,[4290]
    Which can interpret farther: only I say[4291]
    Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan[4292]
    Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead:
    And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late;[4293]                5
    Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
    For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.[4294]
    Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous[4294][4295]
    It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain[4294]
    To kill their gracious father? damned fact![4294]                 10
    How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight,[4296]
    In pious rage, the two delinquents tear,
    That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
    Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too;[4297]
    For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive                          15
    To hear the men deny 't. So that, I say,[4298]
    He has borne all things well: and I do think
    That, had he Duncan's sons under his key--[4299]
    As, an't please heaven, he shall not--they should find[4300]
    What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.                  20
    But, peace! for from broad words, and 'cause he fail'd[4301]
    His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear,
    Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell
    Where he bestows himself?

    _Lord._                   The son of Duncan,[4302][4303]
    From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,                     25
    Lives in the English court, and is received[4304]
    Of the most pious Edward with such grace
    That the malevolence of fortune nothing
    Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff[4305]
    Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid[4306]                 30
    To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward:[4307]
    That by the help of these, with Him above
    To ratify the work, we may again
    Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
    Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,[4308]            35
    Do faithful homage and receive free honours:
    All which we pine for now: and this report
    Hath so exasperate the king that he[4309]
    Prepares for some attempt of war.[4310]

    _Len._                            Sent he to Macduff?

    _Lord._ He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,'[4302]          40
    The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
    And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time
    That clogs me with this answer.'

    _Len._                           And that well might
    Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance[4311]
    His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel                           45
    Fly to the court of England and unfold
    His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
    May soon return to this our suffering country[4312]
    Under a hand accursed!

    _Lord._                I'll send my prayers with him.[4313]

                                                              [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[4093] Forres.] Foris. Capell.

The palace.] A royal Apartment. Rowe. An Apartment in the Palace.
Theobald.

[4094] _king, Cawdor, Glamis_] _king, Glamis, and Cawdor_ Seymour
conj.

[4095] _as_] om. Pope.

_weird_] Theobald. _weyard_ F1. _weyward_ F2F3F4.

_women_] F1F2. _woman_ F3F4.

[4096] _foully_] _fowly_ F1.

[4097] _shine_] _shew_ Collier MS.

[4098] _hope?_] F4. _hope._ F1 F2 F3.

[4099] Sennet sounded.] Senit sounded. Ff.

Lady ... Lennox, Ross,] Lady Macbeth, Lennox, Ross, Rowe. Lady Lenox,
Rosse, Ff. Lady Macbeth, Queen; Ross, Lennox, Capell.

Ladies] Capell. om. Ff.

[4100] _all-thing_] F1. _all-things_ F2. _all things_ F3 F4.

[4101] _I'll_] _I_ A. Hunter.

_Let your highness_] _Lay your highness's_ Rowe. _Lay your highness'_
Pope. _Set your highness'_ Mason conj.

[4102] _upon_] _be upon_ Keightley.

[4103] _We ... ride?_] As in Ff. In Pope the lines end _desir'd ...
grave ... but ... ride?_

[4104] _council_] Rowe. _councell_ F1 F2. _councel_ F3 F4.

_take_] _talk_ Malone. _take't_ Keightley.

[4105] _Is't_] _Is it_ Pope.

[4106] _you_] om. Pope.

[4107] _adieu ... you_] As in Pope, Two lines, the first ending
_night_, in Ff.

[4108] _upon 's_] _upon us_ Pope.

[4109] _night; to ... welcome_,] Theobald. _night, to ... welcome_: Ff.

[4110] _The sweeter ... you_] As in Rowe. Three lines, ending
_welcome: ... alone: ... you,_ in Ff.

[4111] _while_] _till_ Pope.

_be with_] _b' wi'_ Anon. conj.

[Exeunt....] Exeunt Lords. Ff. Exeunt Lady Macbeth, and Lords. Rowe.

[4112] SCENE II. Pope.

[To a Servant. Rowe.

_with you_] om. Steevens (1793), reading _Sirrah ... pleasure?_ as one
line.

[4113] _Sirrah ... gate._] S. Walker would end the lines _you: ...
lord ... gate._

[4114] [Exit Attendant.] Exit Servant. Ff.

[4115] _To be ... dares_,] Arranged as in Rowe. Four lines, ending
_thus: ... deepe, ... that ... dares_, in Ff.

[4116] _nothing; But_] _nothing. But_ Pope. _nothing, but_ Ff.

[4117] _as ... CÃ¦sar._] om. Johnson conj.

[4118] _Mark_] om. Pope.

_CÃ¦sar_] _CÃ¦sar's_ Hanmer.

[4119] _bade_] Theobald (ed. 2). _bad_ Ff.

[4120] _with_] _by_ Capell conj.

[4121] _If 't be_] _If 'tis_ Pope.

[4122] _filed_] _fil'd_ F1 F2. _fill'd_ F3 F4. _'filed_ Warburton.
_soil'd_ Long MS.

[4123] _mind; ... murder'd; ... them, ... kings, ... kings!_]
_Minde, ... murther'd, ... them, ... Kings, ... Kings._ Ff. _mind? ...
murther'd?... them?... kings?... kings?_ Pope.

[4124] _seed_] Pope. _seedes_ F1 F2. _seeds_ F3 F4.

[4125] _And ... there?_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter Servant, and two Murtherers. Ff.

[4126] _Now_] om. Pope.

_go_] om. Steevens (1793).

[Exit Attendant.] Capell. Exit Servant. Ff.

[4127] First Mur.] 1. Mur. Steevens (1793). Murth. Ff.

[4128] _now ... speeches?_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[4129] _Have you_] F1 F2. _You have_ F3 F4.

[4130] _Know ... might_] As in Rowe. Eight lines in Ff, ending
_past, ... fortune, ... selfe ... conference, ... you: ... crost: ...
them: ... might._

[4131] _with you_] om. Steevens conj., ending the line _how_.

[4132] _You ... us._] _True, you made it known._ Pope.

[4133] _I did ... ever?_] As in Rowe. Nine lines, ending _so: ...
now ... meeting ... predominant, ... goe?... man, ... hand ...
begger'd ... ever?_ in Ff.

[4134] _Shoughs_] _Showghes_ Ff. _shocks_ Capell. _Slouths_ Johnson
conj. (withdrawn).

_clept_] Capell. _clipt_ Ff. _cleped_ Theobald. _clep'd_ Hanmer.

[4135] _bill_] _quill_ Collier MS.

[4136] _Not i' the_] _And not in the_ Rowe. _Not in the most_ Keightley.

_worst_] _worser_ Jervis conj.

_say it_] Rowe. _say 't_ Ff.

[4137] _that_] F1 F2. _the_ F3 F4.

[4138] _my liege_] om. Pope.

[4139] _Have ... do_] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[4140] _Have_] Rowe. _Hath_ Ff.

[4141] _weary_] _weary'd_ Capell.

_with disasters, tugg'd_] _with disastrous tuggs_ Warburton. _of
disastrous tuggs_ A. Hunter.

[4142] _Both ... enemy._] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[4143] _For certain ... it is_] See note (V).

[4144] _Who_] _Whom_ Pope.

[4145] _Your ... most_] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

_Within_] _In_ Pope.

_at most_] om. Steevens conj.

[4146] _yourselves_,] _yourselves._ Steevens (1793).

[4147] _you_] _ye_ Seymour conj.

_you ... spy o' the_] _you with a perfect spy o' the_ Johnson
conj. _you with the perfect spot, the_ Tyrwhitt conj. _you with
the perfectry o' the_ Becket conj. _you with the precincts by the_
Jackson conj. _you, with a perfect spy, o' the_ Collier MS.

[4148] _always thought_] _a way, though_, Jackson conj.

[4149] _always ... clearness_:] Omitted by Pope.

[4150] _to you_] om. Steevens conj.

_my lord_] om. Hanmer.

[4151] [Exeunt Murderers.] Theobald. om. Ff.

[4152] [Exit.] Theobald. Exeunt. Ff.

[4153] SCENE II.] Rowe continues the Scene. SCENE III. in Pope.

The palace] Another Apartment in the Palace. Theobald.

[4154] Lady Macbeth] Macbeths Lady, Ff.

[4155] _Madam_] om. Seymour conj.

Lady M.] Lady. Ff. Enter Macbeth. Macb. Strutt conj.

_Nought's had_] om. Steevens conj.

[4156] _safer_] _better_ Hanmer.

[4157] _How...._] Lady M. _How...._ Strutt conj.

[4158] _fancies_] _francies_ F2.

[4159] _all_] om. Hanmer.

[4160] _scotch'd_] Theobald. _scorch'd_ Ff. _switch'd_ or _bruis'd_ A.
Hunter conj.

[4161] _close_] _coil_ A. Hunter.

[4162] _But ... suffer_,] One line in Theobald. Two in Ff, the first
ending _disjoint_. Two in Steevens (1793), the first ending _let_.

_the frame ... suffer_] _both worlds disjoint, and all things suffer_
Pope.

_frame_] _eternal frame_ Collier (Collier MS.), arranging as Ff.

[4163] _our peace_] F1. _our place_ F2 F3 F4. _our seat_ Keightley.

[4164] _In ... grave_;] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

_Duncan is in his_] _Duncan's in 's_ S. Walker conj.

[4165] _Can ... we_] S. Walker would end the lines _lord, ...
jovial ... love; ... remembrance ... both ... we_.

[4166] _further_] _farther_ Collier.

[4167] _among_] F1 _'mong_ F2 F3 F4.

[4168] See note (VI).

[4169] _apply_] F1 _still apply_ F2 F3 F4.

[4170] _Unsafe ... that we_] _Vouchsafe the while your presence.--O,
that we_ Bullock conj.

[4171] _flattering_] _so flattering_ Rowe.

[4172] _visards_] _vizards_ Ff. _vizors_ Theobald.

_to our_] _t' our_ Pope.

[4173] _Fleance_] Rowe. _Fleans_ F1 F3 F4. _Feans_ F2.

_lives_] _live_ Hanmer.

[4174] _eterne_] _eternal_ Pope.

[4175] _shard-borne_] F1 F2. _shard-born_ F3 F4. _sharp-brow'd_
Davenant's version. _sharn-bode_ Daniel conj.

[4176] _Hath ... note._] As in Rowe. In Ff the first line ends at
_peale_.

[4177] _seeling_] Ff. _sealing_ Rowe.

[4178] _Light_] _Night_ Warburton conj.

[4179] _and ... wood_] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[4180] _to the rooky_] _to the murky_ or _to the dusky_ Roderick conj.
_to the rocky_ Jennens. _to rook i' th'_ Steevens conj.

_wood_:] _wood: on earth below_ Keightley.

[4181] _Whiles_] _While_ Capell.

_preys_] F3 F4. _prey's_ F1 F2. _prey_ Pope.

[4182] SCENE III.] SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE IV. Pope.

A park....] A Park, the Castle at a Distance. Rowe.

[4183] _He needs not our_] _We need not to_ Warburton conj. ap.
Theobald MS.

_our_] _to_ Pope.

[4184] _do, To ... just._] _do.--To ... just!_ Johnson conj.

[4185] _lated_] F1. _latest_ F2 F3 F4.

[4186] _and_] _end_ F1.

_near_] _here_ Collier MS.

[4187] _Give us a light_] _Give us light_ Pope. _Give light_ Hanmer.

_Then 'tis he_] _Then it is he_ Pope. _'Tis he_ Capell.

[4188] _Give ... about._] S. Walker would end the lines _ho!...
within ... already ... about,_ reading _it is_ for _'tis_, line 9, and _in_
for _i'_, line 11.

[4189] _the rest ... expectation_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[4190] _That are_] om. Steevens conj.

[4191] _Already_] om. Steevens conj.

[4192] _from_] om. Seymour conj.

[4193] _A light ... to 't._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[4194] Enter....] Ff (after _walk_). Enter Banquo, and Fleance;
Servant, with a Torch, before them. Capell (after _walk_).

Fleance] Fleans, Ff.

[4195] _It will be_] _'Twill_ Steevens conj., reading _Stand ... down_
as one line.

[They....] They fall upon Banquo and kill him; in the scuffle Fleance
escapes. Rowe. om. Ff.

[4196] _O ... fly!_] One line in Hanmer. Two in Ff.

_good_] _godd_ F2. om. Pope.

[4197] [Dies....] Pope. Dies. Rowe. om. Ff.

[4198] _There's ... fled_] As in Ff. Pope ends the lines at _son ...
affair._

_We have_] _We've_ Pope.

[4199] S. Walker would end the lines _away, ... done._

[4200] SCENE IV.] SCENE III. Rowe. SCENE V. Pope.

Hall....] A Room of State. Rowe. A Room of State in the Castle. Pope. A
Hall of State.... Capell.

[4201] A banquet....] Banquet.... Ff. A Banquet set out. Flourish.
Capell.

[4202] _You ... welcome._] Arranged as in Capell (Johnson conj.). The
first line ends at _downe_: in Ff.

[4203] _at first_] _And first_ Rowe (ed. 2). _To first_ A. Hunter
(Johnson conj.).

[4204] _last_] _next_ Johnson conj.

[They sit. Rowe.

[4205] _best_] F1. _the best_ F2 F3 F4.

[4206] _they are_] _they're_ Pope. _their_ Anon. conj.

Enter ... door.] Capell, after line 10. Enter first Murtherer. Ff.

[4207] [Approaching the door] Edd. (Globe ed.). To the Mur. Rowe. To
the Murtherer aside at the door. Pope. om. Ff.

[4208] _There's ... again._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[4209] [Aside. Hunter conj.

_he_] _him_ Hanmer.

[4210] _that I did_] _I did that_ Pope.

[4211] _Thou ... nonpareil._] Arranged as in Rowe. The lines end
_Cutthroats, ... Fleans: ... Non-pareill_] in Ff.

[4212] _o' the_] _of_ Pope.

_good_] _as good_ Long MS.

[4213] [Aside] Grant White (Hunter conj.).

_Then ... perfect_,] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[4214] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4215] [Aside] Indicated by Steevens.

[4216] _hear ourselves_] _hear't ourselves_ Theobald. _hear thee
ourselves_ Hanmer. _hear, ourselves_ Steevens. _hear, ourselves,_
Dyce. _hear thee ourselves_ Keightley.

_ourselves_] _ourself_ Capell conj.

[4217] _sold_] _cold_ Pope.

[4218] _vouch'd_] Ff. _vouched_ Rowe.

_while 'tis a-making_,] _while 'tis a making:_ F1. _while 'tis
making_: F2 F3 F4. _while 'tis making_, Pope. _the while 'tis
making:_ Collier MS.

[4219] _'Tis ... feed_] _Then give the welcome: to eat_ A. Hunter.

[4220] [The Ghost....] Ghost of Banquo rises, ... Capell. Enter the
Ghost of Banquo, and ... Ff, after _it_, line 37. Staunton transfers,
to follow _mischance!_ line 43: Keightley, to follow _company_, line
45. The Ghost of Duncan ... Seymour conj.

[4221] _Who_] _Whom_ Pope.

[4222] _mischance!_] Pope. _mischance._ Ff.

[4223] _Please't_] _Please it_ Steevens.

[4224] _company._] Dyce. _company?_ Ff.

[starting. Rowe.

[4225] _Here is_] _Here's_ Pope (ed. 2).

[4226] _Here ... highness?_] One line in Capell. Two in Ff.

_my good lord_] _my lord_ Steevens (1793), reading _Where?...
highness?_ as one line.

[4227] _momentary_] F1. _momentany_ F2 F3 F4.

_upon_] _on_ Pope.

[4228] _Feed_] _Eat_ A. Hunter.

[To Macbeth. Rowe. To Macb. aside. Pope.

[4229] _Are ... is._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[4230] _O_] om. Pope.

[4231] [Aside. Pope.

[4232] _Impostors to true_] F1 F3 F4. _Imposters to true_ F2.
_Importers to true_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _Impostors of true_
Hanmer. _Impostures true to_ Johnson conj. _Impostures of true_ Capell.

[4233] [Pointing to the Ghost. Rowe.

_Prithee ... you?_] One line in Capell. Two in Ff.

[4234] [Exit Ghost.] F2 F3 F4. Omitted in F1. Ghost vanishes. Rowe.

_in folly_] om. Steevens conj.

[4235] _olden_] _olde_ Rowe (ed. 1). _golden_ Mason conj. _elden_
Seymour conj.

[4236] _humane_] Ff. _human_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_gentle_] _gen'ral_ Theobald (Warburton). _ungentle_ Seymour conj.

[4237] _have been_] _hath been_ Johnson.

[4238] _time has_] Edd. _times has_ F1. _times have_ F2 F3 F4.

[4239] _do forget_] _forgot_ Pope.

[4240] _Come_,] om. Pope.

[4241] _o'_] _of_ Rowe.

[4242] _And all_] _And hail_ Johnson conj. (withdrawn).

[4243] [The Lords rise. Jennens conj.

[4244] Re-enter Ghost.] The Ghost rises again. Pope. Enter Ghost. Ff,
after line 88. As he is drinking, the Ghost rises again just before
him. Rowe, after line 88. Enter Banquo's Ghost. Seymour conj. Enter
Duncan's Ghost. Strutt conj.

[4245] _the Hyrcan_] _th' Hircan_ F1 F2. _th' Hyrcan_ F3 F4.
_Hyrcanian_ Pope (Davenant's version). _Hyrcan_ Johnson. _the
Hircanian_ Capell.

[4246] _or be alive_] _O be alive_ Rowe (ed. 2). _Be alive_ Pope.

[4247] _trembling I inhabit then_,] F1. _trembling I inhabit, then_
F2 F3 F4. _trembling I inhibit, then_ Pope. _trembling me inhibit,
then_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _trembling I evade it, then_
Johnson conj. _trembling I in habit then,_ Jennens. _trembling I,
in habit then_ Jennens conj. _trembling I inhibit thee,_ Malone
(Steevens conj.). _trembling I exhibit, then_ A. Hunter (Robinson
conj., Gent. Mag. Vol. LIX. 1201). _tremblingly inhabile, then_ Becket
conj. _trembling I inhibit then_, Elwin. _blenching I evade it, then_
Bailey conj. _trembling I evitate it, then_ Keightley. _trembling I
unknight me, then_ Bullock conj. _trembling I inherit, then_ Anon.
conj.

_protest_] _protect_ F4.

[4248] _horrible_] _terrible_ Theobald (ed. 2), Warburton and Johnson.

[4249] [Exit Ghost.] Exit. F2 F3 F4, after _shadow_, line 106. om. F1.
Ghost vanishes. Rowe, after _gone._ Ghost disappears. Dyce.

_being gone_] F1 F2. _be gone_ F3 F4.

[4250] [The Lords rise. Rowe.

[4251] _broke ... disorder._] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[4252] Macb. _Can ... You_] Lady M. _Can't ... wonder?_ Macb. _You_
Warburton.

[4253] _to_] _at_ Hanmer.

_owe_] _know_ Johnson conj. (withdrawn).

[4254] _When now_] _Now when_ Hanmer.

[4255] _cheeks_] _cheek_ Hanmer.

[4256] _is_] _are_ Malone.

_sights_] F1. _signes_ F2 F3. _signs_ F4.

[4257] _A kind_] om. Pope.

[Exeunt ...] Exeunt Rosse, Lenox, Lords, and Attendants. Capell. Exit
Lords. F1. Exeunt Lords. F2 F3 F4.

[4258] _It ... blood_:] One line in Rowe. Two, the first ending _say_,
in Ff.

_blood: they say_] _blood, they say_ Pope. _blood they say_, Ff.
_blood.--They say,_ Johnson.

[4259] _speak; Augures_] _speak Augures;_ Singer conj.

[4260] _Augures_] Ff. _Augurs_ Theobald. _Auguries_ Rann (Steevens
conj.). See note (VII).

_and understood_] _that understood_ Rowe. _that understand_ Warburton.

[4261] _maggot-pies and_] _mag-pies, and by_ Pope.

_choughs_] _coughs_ Warburton.

[4262] _sir?_] om. Collier conj.

[4263] _hear_] _heard_ Keightley.

[4264] _There's not a one_] _There is not one_ Pope.

_a one_] _a Thane_ Theobald. _a man_ Grant White.

[4265] _I keep_] _I'll keep_ Collier MS.

[4266] _I ... sisters_:] S. Walker would end the lines _fee'd ...
will, ... sisters._

[4267] _And betimes ... to_] _Betimes ... unto_ Pope. _And
betimes ... unto_ Rann. _Ay, and betimes ... to_ Anon. conj.

_I will_] _will I_ Lettsom conj.

_weird_] Theobald. _weyard_ F1. _wizard_ F2 F3 F4.

[4268] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4269] _worst. For ... good_] Johnson. _worst, for ... good_, Ff.
_worst, for ... good_; Rowe.

[4270] _Stepp'd_] _Stept_ F1. _Spent_ F2 F3 F4.

[4271] _go_] _going_ Hanmer.

[4272] _natures_] _nature_ A. Hunter.

[4273] _to_] _too_ Warburton.

[4274] _We are_] _We're_ Pope.

_in deed_] Theobald. _indeed_ Ff. _in deeds_ Hanmer.

[4275] SCENE V.] SCENE IV. Rowe. SCENE VI. Pope.

A heath.] The Heath. Rowe. Hecate.] F3 F4. Hecat. F1 F2.

[4276] _reason, beldams_] Knight. _reason_ (_Beldams_) Ff.

[4277] _are, ... over-bold?_] Capell. _are? ... over-bold,_ Ff.

[4278] _wayward_] _weyward_ Pope.

[4279] _Spiteful ... do_,] _A spiteful and a wrathful, who_ Steevens
conj.

[4280] _Loves_] _Lives_ Halliwell conj.

[4281] _the_] _th'_ Ff.

[4282] _dismal and a fatal_] _dismal, fatal_ Pope. _dismal-fatal_
Steevens (1793).

[4283] _sleights_] _slights_ Ff.

[4284] _raise_] _rise_ F2.

[4285] _mortals'_] Theobald (ed. 2). _mortals_ Ff. _mortal's_ Rowe.

[Music ... _away_,' &c.] Capell, substantially. Musicke, and a Song. Ff.

[4286] _a_] _the_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[Sing within. Come away, come away, &c. Ff.

[Exit.] Capell. om. Ff.

[4287] _back again._] As in Pope. As a separate line in Ff.

[4288] SCENE VI.] SCENE V. Rowe. SCENE VII. Pope.

Forres. The palace.] A Chamber. Theobald. Foris. A Room in the Palace.
Capell.

[4289] another Lord.] Angus. A. Hunter (Johnson conj.).

[4290] _My ... thoughts_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4291] _farther_] _further_ Johnson.

[4292] _borne_] _born_ F4.

[4293] _right-valiant_] Hyphen inserted by Theobald.

[4294] _late. Who ... father?_] Ff. _late Who ... father._ Grant White
conj. (withdrawn).

[4295] _Who cannot want_] _You cannot want_ Hanmer. _Who can want_ or
_Who cannot have_ Jennens conj. _Who care not, want_ Jackson conj.
_We cannot want_ Keightley.

_monstrous_] _monstrous too_ Pope. _monsterous_ Capell.

[4296] _it did grieve Macbeth!_] Capell. _it did greeve Macbeth?_ Ff.
_did it grieve Macbeth?_ Pope.

[4297] _not that_] F1 F2. _that not_ F3 F4.

_and_] om. Pope.

[4298] _deny 't_] _deny it_ Capell.

[4299] _his key_] F1. _the key_ F2 F3 F4.

[4300] _an't_] Theobald (ed. 2). _and 't_ Ff.

_should_] F1. _shall_ F2 F3 F4.

[4301] _'cause_] Pope. _cause_ Ff.

[4302] Lord.] Ang. A. Hunter (Johnson conj.).

[4303] _son_] Theobald. _Sonnes_ F1 F2 F3. _Sons_ F4.

[4304] _Lives_] F1. _Live_ F2 F3 F4.

_is_] Ff. _are_ Rowe.

[4305] Arranged as in Ff. Steevens (1773, 1778, 1785) transferred _is
gone_ to end of line 29.

[4306] _holy_] om. Pope.

_upon_] _on_ Capell. om. Anon. conj.

_upon his aid_] _in aid_ Anon. conj.

[4307] _Siward_] Theobald (ed. 2). Hanmer. _Seyward_ Ff.

[4308] _Free_] _Fright_ or _Fray_ Steevens conj.

_Free ... banquets_] _Our feasts and banquets free from_ Malone conj.

[4309] _exasperate_] _exasperated_ Rowe (ed. 2). _exasp'rated_ Pope.

_the king_] Hanmer. _their king_ Ff. _our king_ Anon. conj.

[4310] _of war_] om. Pope.

[4311] _to a caution, to_] _to a caution, t'_ Ff. _to a care to_ Pope.
_caution and to_ Steevens conj.

[4312] _suffering country_] _country, suffering_ Capell conj.

[4313] _I'll send ... him._] _My prayers with him!_ Steevens (1793).




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _A cavern. In the middle, a boiling cauldron._[4314]

                 _Thunder. Enter the three_ Witches.

    _First Witch._ Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.

    _Sec. Witch._ Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.[4315]

    _Third Witch._ Harpier cries ''Tis time, 'tis time.'[4316]

    _First Witch._ Round about the cauldron go:
    In the poison'd entrails throw.[4317]                              5
    Toad, that under cold stone[4318]
    Days and nights has thirty one[4319]
    Swelter'd venom sleeping got,[4320]
    Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

    _All._ Double, double toil and trouble;[4321]                     10
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

    _Sec. Witch._ Fillet of a fenny snake,[4322]
    In the cauldron boil and bake;
    Eye of newt and toe of frog,
    Wool of bat and tongue of dog,                                    15
    Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,[4323]
    Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,[4324]
    For a charm of powerful trouble,
    Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

    _All._ Double, double toil and trouble;                           20
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

    _Third Witch._ Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
    Witches' mummy, maw and gulf[4325]
    Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,[4326]
    Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,                               25
    Liver of blaspheming Jew,
    Gall of goat and slips of yew
    Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse,[4327]
    Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
    Finger of birth-strangled babe                                    30
    Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
    Make the gruel thick and slab:
    Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,[4328]
    For the ingredients of our cauldron.[4329]

    _All._ Double, double toil and trouble;                           35
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

    _Sec. Witch._ Cool it with a baboon's blood,
    Then the charm is firm and good.

           _Enter_ HECATE _to the other three_ Witches.[4330]

    _Hec._ O, well done! I commend your pains;[4331]
    And every one shall share i' the gains:                           40
    And now about the cauldron sing,
    Like elves and fairies in a ring,
    Enchanting all that you put in.

                               [_Music and a song_: 'Black spirits,' &c.
                                                [_Hecate retires._[4332]

    _Sec. Witch._ By the pricking of my thumbs,
    Something wicked this way comes:                                  45
    Open, locks,[4333]
    Whoever knocks![4333]

                            _Enter_ MACBETH.

    _Macb._ How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags![4334]
    What is't you do?

    _All._            A deed without a name.

    _Macb._ I conjure you, by that which you profess,                 50
    Howe'er you come to know it, answer me:
    Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
    Against the churches; though the yesty waves
    Confound and swallow navigation up;
    Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down;[4335]          55
    Though castles topple on their warders' heads;[4336]
    Though palaces and pyramids do slope[4337]
    Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure
    Of nature's germins tumble all together,[4338]
    Even till destruction sicken; answer me                           60
    To what I ask you.

    _First Witch._     Speak.

    _Sec. Witch._            Demand.

    _Third Witch._                   We'll answer.

    _First Witch._ Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,[4339]
    Or from our masters?[4340]

    _Macb._              Call 'em, let me see 'em.

    _First Witch._ Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten
    Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten[4341]                      65
    From the murderer's gibbet throw
    Into the flame.

    _All._          Come, high or low;
    Thyself and office deftly show!

         _Thunder. First_ Apparition: _an armed Head_.[4342]

    _Macb._ Tell me, thou unknown power,--[4343]

    _First Witch._                              He knows thy thought:
    Hear his speech, but say thou nought.                             70

    _First App._ Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! beware Macduff;[4344]
    Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me: enough.[4345]

                                                            [_Descends._

    _Macb._ Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution thanks;
    Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,--[4346]

    _First Witch._ He will not be commanded: here's another,          75
    More potent than the first.

        _Thunder. Second_ Apparition: _a bloody Child_.[4347]

    _Sec. App._ Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!

    _Macb._ Had I three ears, I'ld hear thee.

    _Sec. App._ Be bloody, bold and resolute; laugh to scorn[4348][4349]
    The power of man, for none of woman born[4348]                    80
    Shall harm Macbeth.[4348]            [_Descends._

    _Macb._ Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
    But yet I'll make assurance double sure,[4350]
    And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live;
    That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,                        85
    And sleep in spite of thunder.

_Thunder. Third_ Apparition: _a Child crowned, with a tree in his hand_.

                                   What is this,[4351][4352]
    That rises like the issue of a king,[4351]
    And wears upon his baby-brow the round
    And top of sovereignty?

    _All._                  Listen, but speak not to 't.[4353]

    _Third App._ Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care[4354]       90
    Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:
    Macbeth shall never vanquished be until
    Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill[4355]
    Shall come against him.          [_Descends._[4356]

    _Macb._                 That will never be:
    Who can impress the forest, bid the tree                          95
    Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements! good!
    Rebellion's head, rise never, till the wood[4357]
    Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth[4358]
    Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
    To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart[4359]                    100
    Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
    Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever[4360]
    Reign in this kingdom?

    _All._                Seek to know no more.

    _Macb._ I will be satisfied: deny me this,
    And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know:[4361][4362]       105
    Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?[4362]

                                                      [_Hautboys._[4363]

    _First Witch._ Show!

    _Sec. Witch._ Show!

    _Third Witch._ Show!

    _All._ Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;[4359]                110
    Come like shadows, so depart!

 _A show of eight_ Kings, _the last with a glass in his hand; Banquo's_
                        _Ghost following._[4364]

    _Macb._ Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo: down!
    Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair,[4365]
    Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.[4366]
    A third is like the former. Filthy hags!                         115
    Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes![4367]
    What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
    Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more:
    And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass[4368]
    Which shows me many more; and some I see                         120
    That two-fold balls and treble sceptres carry:
    Horrible sight! Now I see 'tis true;[4369]
    For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
    And points at them for his. What, is this so?[4370]

    _First Witch._ Ay, sir, all this is so: but why[4371][4372]      125
    Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?[4348]
    Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,[4348][4373]
    And show the best of our delights:[4348]
    I'll charm the air to give a sound,[4348]
    While you perform your antic round,[4348][4374]                  130
    That this great king may kindly say[4348]
    Our duties did his welcome pay.[4348]

        [_Music. The Witches dance, and then vanish, with Hecate._[4375]

    _Macb._ Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour[4376]
    Stand aye accursed in the calendar!
    Come in, without there!

                            _Enter_ LENNOX.

    _Len._ What's your grace's will?                                 135

    _Macb._ Saw you the weird sisters?[4377]

    _Len._                             No, my lord.

    _Macb._ Came they not by you?

    _Len._                        No indeed, my lord.

    _Macb._ Infected be the air whereon they ride,
    And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
    The galloping of horse: who was't came by?                       140

    _Len._ 'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
    Macduff is fled to England.

    _Macb._ Fled to England!

    _Len._ Ay, my good lord.

    _Macb._ [_Aside_] Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits:[4378]
    The flighty purpose never is o'ertook                            145
    Unless the deed go with it: from this moment
    The very firstlings of my heart shall be[4379]
    The firstlings of my hand. And even now,[4380]
    To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:[4381]
    The castle of Macduff I will surprise;                           150
    Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword
    His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls[4382]
    That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;[4383]
    This deed I'll do before this purpose cool:[4384]
    But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?[4385]            155
    Come, bring me where they are.                            [_Exeunt._


SCENE II. _Fife. Macduff's castle._[4386]

           _Enter_ LADY MACDUFF, _her_ Son, _and_ ROSS.[4387]

    _L. Macd._ What had he done, to make him fly the land?[4388]

    _Ross._ You must have patience, madam.

    _L. Macd._                             He had none:
    His flight was madness: when our actions do not,
    Our fears do make us traitors.

    _Ross._                        You know not
    Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.                             5

    _L. Macd._ Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
    His mansion and his titles, in a place
    From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
    He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren,
    The most diminutive of birds, will fight,[4389]                   10
    Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
    All is the fear and nothing is the love;
    As little is the wisdom, where the flight
    So runs against all reason.

    _Ross._                     My dearest coz,[4390]
    I pray you, school yourself: but, for your husband,               15
    He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows[4391]
    The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further:[4392]
    But cruel are the times, when we are traitors
    And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumour[4393][4394]
    From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,[4394]               20
    But float upon a wild and violent sea[4395]
    Each way and move. I take my leave of you:[4396]
    Shall not be long but I'll be here again:[4397]
    Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
    To what they were before. My pretty cousin,                       25
    Blessing upon you![4398]

    _L. Macd._ Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.[4398][4399]

    _Ross._ I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,[4398]
    It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:[4398]
    I take my leave at once.[4398]            [_Exit._

    _L. Macd._               Sirrah, your father's dead:[4400]        30
    And what will you do now? How will you live?

    _Son._ As birds do, mother.

    _L. Macd._                  What, with worms and flies?[4401]

    _Son._ With what I get, I mean; and so do they.[4402]

    _L. Macd._ Poor bird! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,[4403]
    The pitfall nor the gin.[4404]                                    35

    _Son._ Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set
        for.[4404][4405]
    My father is not dead, for all your saying.[4404][4406]

    _L. Macd._ Yes, he is dead: how wilt thou do for a father?[4404][4407]

    _Son._ Nay, how will you do for a husband?[4404]

    _L. Macd._ Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.[4404]          40

    _Son._ Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.[4404][4408]

    _L. Macd._ Thou speak'st with all thy wit, and yet, i'
        faith,[4404][4409][4410]
    With wit enough for thee.[4404][4410]

    _Son._ Was my father a traitor, mother?

    _L. Macd._ Ay, that he was.                                       45

    _Son._ What is a traitor?

    _L. Macd._ Why, one that swears and lies.

    _Son._ And be all traitors that do so?[4411]

    _L. Macd._ Every one that does so is a traitor, and must[4412]
    be hang'd.[4412]                                                  50

    _Son._ And must they all be hang'd that swear and lie?

    _L. Macd._ Every one.

    _Son._ Who must hang them?

    _L. Macd._ Why, the honest men.[4413]

    _Son._ Then the liars and swearers are fools; for there           55
    are liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and[4414]
    hang up them.

    _L. Macd._ Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how[4415][4416]
    wilt thou do for a father?[4416]

    _Son._ If he were dead, you'd weep for him: if you would          60
    not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new
    father.

    _L. Macd._ Poor prattler, how thou talk'st![4417]

                          _Enter a_ Messenger.

    _Mess._ Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
    Though in your state of honour I am perfect.                      65
    I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:
    If you will take a homely man's advice,
    Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.[4418]
    To fright you thus, methinks I am too savage;[4418]
    To do worse to you were fell cruelty,[4419]                       70
    Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
    I dare abide no longer.             [_Exit._[4420]

    _L. Macd._              Whither should I fly?
    I have done no harm. But I remember now[4421]
    I am in this earthly world, where to do harm[4422]
    Is often laudable, to do good sometime                            75
    Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas,
    Do I put up that womanly defence,
    To say I have done no harm?--What are these faces?[4423]

                           _Enter_ Murderers.

    _First Mur._ Where is your husband?[4424]

    _L. Macd._ I hope, in no place so unsanctified                    80
    Where such as thou mayst find him.

    _First Mur._                       He's a traitor.

    _Son._ Thou liest, thou shag-ear'd villain![4425]

    _First Mur._                                What, you egg!

                                                        [_Stabbing him._

    Young fry of treachery!

    _Son._             He has kill'd me, mother:[4426]
    Run away, I pray you![4427]            [_Dies._

                [_Exit Lady Macduff, crying_'Murder!' _Exeunt murderers,
                                                         following her._


SCENE III. _England. Before the King's palace._[4428]

                     _Enter_ MALCOLM _and_ MACDUFF.

    _Mal._ Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there
    Weep our sad bosoms empty.

    _Macd._                    Let us rather
    Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
    Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn[4429]
    New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows                      5
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
    Like syllable of dolour.[4430]

    _Mal._                   What I believe, I'll wail;
    What know, believe; and what I can redress,
    As I shall find the time to friend, I will.                       10
    What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
    This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
    Was once thought honest: you have loved him well;
    He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young; but something[4431]
    You may deserve of him through me; and wisdom[4432]               15
    To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb[4433]
    To appease an angry god.

    _Macd._ I am not treacherous.

    _Mal._                        But Macbeth is.
    A good and virtuous nature may recoil
    In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon;[4434]       20
    That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose:
    Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell:
    Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,[4435]
    Yet grace must still look so.[4436]

    _Macd._                       I have lost my hopes.

    _Mal._ Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.[4437]     25
    Why in that rawness left you wife and child,[4438]
    Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
    Without leave-taking? I pray you,[4439]
    Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
    But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,                   30
    Whatever I shall think.

    _Macd._                 Bleed, bleed, poor country:
    Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
    For goodness dare not check thee: wear thou thy wrongs;[4440]
    The title is affeer'd. Fare thee well, lord:[4441]
    I would not be the villain that thou think'st[4442]               35
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.

    _Mal._                     Be not offended:
    I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
    It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash                      40
    Is added to her wounds: I think withal
    There would be hands uplifted in my right;
    And here from gracious England have I offer
    Of goodly thousands: but for all this,[4443]
    When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,                        45
    Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
    Shall have more vices than it had before,
    More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
    By him that shall succeed.

    _Macd._                    What should he be?

    _Mal._ It is myself I mean: in whom I know                        50
    All the particulars of vice so grafted
    That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth[4444]
    Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
    Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
    With my confineless harms.

    _Macd._                    Not in the legions                     55
    Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
    In evils to top Macbeth.[4445]

    _Mal._                   I grant him bloody,
    Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
    Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin[4446]
    That has a name: but there's no bottom, none,                     60
    In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
    Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up
    The cistern of my lust, and my desire[4447]
    All continent impediments would o'erbear,
    That did oppose my will: better Macbeth                           65
    Than such an one to reign.[4448]

    _Macd._                    Boundless intemperance
    In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
    The untimely emptying of the happy throne,
    And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
    To take upon you what is yours: you may                           70
    Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,[4449]
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink:[4450]
    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be[4451]
    That vulture in you, to devour so many
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,                         75
    Finding it so inclined.

    _Mal._                  With this there grows
    In my most ill-composed affection such
    A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
    I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
    Desire his jewels and this other's house:                         80
    And my more-having would be as a sauce
    To make me hunger more, that I should forge
    Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,[4452]
    Destroying them for wealth.

    _Macd._                     This avarice
    Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root[4453]              85
    Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been[4454]
    The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear;
    Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will[4455]
    Of your mere own: all these are portable,[4456]
    With other graces weigh'd.                                        90

    _Mal._ But I have none: the king-becoming graces,
    As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,
    Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
    Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
    I have no relish of them, but abound                              95
    In the division of each several crime,
    Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
    Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,[4457]
    Uproar the universal peace, confound[4458]
    All unity on earth.

    _Macd._             O Scotland, Scotland!                        100

    _Mal._ If such a one be fit to govern, speak:
    I am as I have spoken.

    _Macd._                Fit to govern![4459]
    No, not to live. O nation miserable![4459]
    With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
    When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,                    105
    Since that the truest issue of thy throne
    By his own interdiction stands accursed,[4460]
    And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
    Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee,
    Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,                         110
    Died every day she lived. Fare thee well![4461]
    These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
    Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,[4462]
    Thy hope ends here!

    _Mal._              Macduff, this noble passion,
    Child of integrity, hath from my soul                            115
    Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
    To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth[4463]
    By many of these trains hath sought to win me
    Into his power; and modest wisdom plucks me
    From over-credulous haste: but God above                         120
    Deal between thee and me! for even now
    I put myself to thy direction, and
    Unspeak mine own detraction; here abjure[4464]
    The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
    For strangers to my nature. I am yet                             125
    Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,[4465]
    Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
    At no time broke my faith, would not betray
    The devil to his fellow, and delight
    No less in truth than life: my first false speaking              130
    Was this upon myself: what I am truly,
    Is thine and my poor country's to command:
    Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,[4466]
    Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men,[4467]
    Already at a point, was setting forth.[4468]                     135
    Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness[4469]
    Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?[4470]

    _Macd._ Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
    'Tis hard to reconcile.

                           _Enter a_ Doctor.

    _Mal._ Well, more anon. Comes the king forth, I pray you?[4471]  140

    _Doct._ Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls
    That stay his cure: their malady convinces[4472]
    The great assay of art; but at his touch,
    Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
    They presently amend.

    _Mal._          I thank you, doctor.      [_Exit Doctor._[4473]  145

    _Macd._ What's the disease he means?

    _Mal._                               'Tis call'd the evil:
    A most miraculous work in this good king;
    Which often, since my here-remain in England,[4474]
    I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,[4475]
    Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people,[4476]          150
    All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
    The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
    Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
    Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken,
    To the succeeding royalty he leaves                              155
    The healing benediction. With this strange virtue
    He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
    And sundry blessings hang about his throne
    That speak him full of grace.

                          _Enter_ ROSS.[4477]

    _Macd._                       See, who comes here?

    _Mal._ My countryman; but yet I know him not.                    160

    _Macd._ My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.

    _Mal._ I know him now: good God, betimes remove[4478]
    The means that makes us strangers![4479]

    _Ross._                            Sir, amen.

    _Macd._ Stands Scotland where it did?

    _Ross._                               Alas, poor country!
    Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot                          165
    Be call'd our mother, but our grave: where nothing,[4480]
    But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
    Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air,[4481]
    Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems
    A modern ecstasy: the dead man's knell[4482]                     170
    Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives[4483]
    Expire before the flowers in their caps,
    Dying or ere they sicken.[4484]

    _Macd._                   O, relation
    Too nice, and yet too true![4485]

    _Mal._                      What's the newest grief?[4485][4486]

    _Ross._ That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker;             175
    Each minute teems a new one.

    _Macd._                      How does my wife?

    _Ross._ Why, well.

    _Macd._            And all my children?

    _Ross._                                 Well too.

    _Macd._ The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?

    _Ross._ No; they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.

    _Macd._ Be not a niggard of your speech: how goes 't?[4487]      180

    _Ross._ When I came hither to transport the tidings,
    Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour
    Of many worthy fellows that were out;
    Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
    For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot:                        185
    Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland
    Would create soldiers, make our women fight,[4488]
    To doff their dire distresses.

    _Mal._                         Be't their comfort
    We are coming thither: gracious England hath[4489]
    Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;[4490]                  190
    An older and a better soldier none
    That Christendom gives out.

    _Ross._                     Would I could answer
    This comfort with the like! But I have words
    That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
    Where hearing should not latch them.

    _Macd._                          What concern they?[4491][4492]  195
    The general cause? or is it a fee-grief[4492]
    Due to some single breast?

    _Ross._                    No mind that's honest
    But in it shares some woe, though the main part
    Pertains to you alone.

    _Macd._                If it be mine,
    Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.                     200

    _Ross._ Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
    Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
    That ever yet they heard.

    _Macd._                   Hum! I guess at it.[4493]

    _Ross._ Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes
    Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner,                      205
    Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer,
    To add the death of you.

    _Mal._                   Merciful heaven!
    What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows;
    Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak
    Whispers the o'er-fraught heart, and bids it break.              210

    _Macd._ My children too?

    _Ross._                  Wife, children, servants, all[4494]
    That could be found.[4494]

    _Macd._              And I must be from thence![4494]
    My wife kill'd too?[4494]

    _Ross._             I have said.[4495]

    _Mal._                           Be comforted:
    Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,
    To cure this deadly grief.                                       215

    _Macd._ He has no children. All my pretty ones?[4496]
    Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?[4497][4498][4499]
    What, all my pretty chickens and their dam[4498]
    At one fell swoop?[4498]

    _Mal._ Dispute it like a man.

    _Macd._                       I shall do so;[4500]               220
    But I must also feel it as a man:
    I cannot but remember such things were,
    That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
    And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
    They were all struck for thee! naught that I am,[4501]           225
    Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
    Fell slaughter on their souls: heaven rest them now!

    _Mal._ Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief
    Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.[4502]

    _Macd._ O, I could play the woman with mine eyes,                230
    And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,[4503]
    Cut short all intermission; front to front
    Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;[4504]
    Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,
    Heaven forgive him too!

    _Mal._                  This tune goes manly.[4505]              235
    Come, go we to the king; our power is ready;
    Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
    Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
    Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may;
    The night is long that never finds the day.          [_Exeunt._  240

FOOTNOTES:

[4314] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Actus Quartus. ScÃ¦na Prima. F1. Actus
Quintus ... F2 F3 F4.

A ... cauldron.] Capell, substantially. A dark Cave, in the middle a
great Cauldron burning. Rowe.

[4315] _Thrice and_] Staunton and Delius. _Thrice, and_ Ff. _Twice,
and_ Theobald. _Thrice; and_ Steevens (1778).

_hedge-pig_] _Hedge-Pigge_ F1. _Hedges Pigge_ F2. _Hedges Pig_ F3 F4.

[4316] _Harpier_] _Harper_ Pope. _Hark, her_ Jackson conj. _Harpy_
Steevens conj.

_cries 'Tis_] _cries, 'tis_ Ff. _cries--'tis_ Steevens (1773).
_cries:--'tis_ Steevens (1778).

[4317] _entrails_] _entremes_ Warburton conj.

[They march round the Cauldron, and throw in the several Ingredients as
for the Preparation of their Charm. Rowe.

[4318] _Toad, that_] _This toad, which_ Davenant's version.
_Toadstool_, Bullock conj.

_under cold_] _under mossy_ Davenant's version. _under the cold_ Rowe
(ed. 2). _under coldest_ Steevens (1793). _under a cold_ Staunton conj.
_underneath cold_ Keightley. _under cold cold_ Anon. conj. _under
some cold_ Anon. conj.

[4319] _has_] F3 F4. _ha's_ F1 F2. _hast_ Hanmer.

_one_] _one_, Pope. _one_: Ff.

[4320] _venom sleeping_] _venom, sleeping_ Delius.

[4321] _Double, double_] Steevens. _Double, double_, Ff.

[4322] Sec. Witch.] 2. Ff. 1 Witch. Pope (ed. 2).

[4323] _blind-worm's_] _blind-worm_ Pope.

[4324] _howlet's_] _owlet's_ Pope.

[4325] _Witches'_] Theobald (ed. 2). _Witches_ Ff. _Witch's_ Singer.

[4326] _ravin'd_] _ravening_ Pope. _ravin_ Rann (Mason conj.).

_salt-sea shark_] Capell. _salt Sea sharke_ Ff. _salt sea-shark_ Pope.

[4327] _Sliver'd_] _Silver'd_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4328] _chaudron_] _chawdron_ Ff. _chauldron_ Keightley.

[4329] _ingredients_] Rowe. _Ingredience_ Ff.

_cauldron_] F3 F4. _cawdron_ F1 F2.

[4330] Enter ...] Edd. (Globe ed.). Enter Hecat, and the other three
Witches. Ff (Hecate, F3 F4). Enter Hecate, and other three Witches.
Rowe. Enter Hecate, and other Witches. Collier. Enter Hecate. Dyce
(Ritson conj.).

[4331] _O_] om. Anon. conj.

[4332] _Black spirits_, &c.] See note (VIII).

[Hecate retires.] Edd. (Globe ed.). Exit Hecate. Dyce. om. Ff.

[4333] _Open ... knocks!_] As in Dyce. One line in Ff.

[4334] SCENE II. Pope.

[4335] _bladed_] _bleaded_ Collier (Collier MS.). _bearded_ Beisly conj.

[4336] _on_] _o'er_ Collier MS.

[4337] _slope_] _stoop_ Capell conj.

[4338] _germins_] Theobald. _germaine_ F1 F2. _germain_ F3 F4.
_germains_ Pope. _germen_ Delius.

_all together_] Pope. _altogether_ Ff.

[4339] _thou'dst_] Capell. _th' hadst_ Ff.

[4340] _masters?_] Pope. _masters._ Ff. _masters'?_ Capell. _'em ...
'em_] _them ... them_ Capell.

[4341] _grease_] Pope. _greaze_ F1. _greace_ F2 F3 F4. _grace_ Rowe
(ed. 2).

[4342] First Apparition ...] 1. Apparation, an Armed Head. Ff
(Apparition, F3 F4). Apparition of an armed Head rises. Rowe.

[4343] _power,--_] _power--_ Rowe. _power._ Ff.

[4344] _Macbeth ... Macduff_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4345] [Descends.] Rowe. He Descends. Ff.

[4346] _Thou hast_] _Thou'st_ Pope.

_harp'd_] _happ'd_ Becket conj.

_more,--_] _more--_ Rowe. _more._ Ff.

[4347] Second Apparition ...] 2 Apparition, a Bloody Childe. Ff.
Apparition of a bloody Child rises. Rowe.

[4348] _Be ... Macbeth._] In Reed (1803) the lines end _bold, ...
man, ... Macbeth._

[4349] _Be ... scorn_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4350] _assurance double_] Pope, _assurance: double_ F1. _assurance,
double_ F2 F3 F4.

[4351] _What ... king_,] As in Rowe. One line in Ff.

[4352] Third ...] 3 Apparation ... hand. Ff (Apparition, F3 F4).
Apparition of ... rises. Rowe.

[4353] _top_] _type_ Theobald conj.

_to 't_] om. Pope.

[4354] _lion-mettled_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

[4355] _Birnam_] F4. _Byrnam_ F1 F2 F3.

_high Dunsinane_] _high Dunsmane_ F4. _Dunsinane's high_ Pope.

[4356] [Descends.] Rowe. Descend. Ff.

[4357] _Rebellion's head_] Hanmer (Theobald conj.). _Rebellious dead_
Ff. _Rebellious head_ Theobald (Warburton).

[4358] _Birnam_] F4. _Byrnan_ F1. _Byrnam_ F2 F3.

[4359] _heart_] _hart_ F1.

[4360] [The Cauldron sinks into the ground. Rowe.

[4361] [Thunder; and the Cauldron sinks. Horrid Musick. Capell.

[4362] _know: Why_] _know Why_ S. Walker conj.

[4363] [Hautboys.] Hoboyes. F1 F2 F3. Hoboys. F4.

[4364] A show....] A show of eight Kings, and Banquo last, with a
glasse in his hand. Ff. Eight Kings appear and pass over in order,
and Banquo last, with a Glass in his Hand. Rowe. Eight ... order, and
Banquo; the last, with a glass in his hand. Theobald. Eight ... order,
the last holding a glass in his hand: with Banquo following them Hanmer.

[4365] _eye-balls. And thy hair_,] _eye-balls; and thy hair._ Collier
MS.

_hair_] _haire_ Ff. _air_ Warburton (Johnson). _heir_ Jackson conj.

[4366] _is_] _art_ Collier MS.

[4367] _eyes_] F1. _eye_ F2 F3 F4.

[4368] _eighth_] F3 F4. _eight_ F1 F2.

[4369] _Now_] _nay now_ Pope. _Ay, now_ Steevens (1793).

[4370] _What, is_] Pope. _What? is_ F1. _What is_ F2 F3 F4.

[4371] First Witch.] Hec. Edd. conj.

[4372] _Ay, ... pay._] Omit as spurious. Anon. conj.

[4373] _sprites_] _sprights_ Ff.

[4374] _antic_] _antick_ Theobald. _antique_ Ff.

[4375] The Witches ... Hecate.] Edd. (Globe ed.). The Witches Dance,
and vanish. Ff.

[4376] _Where ... hour_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4377] _weird_] Theobald. _weyard_ F1. _wizard_ F2 F3. _wizards_ F4.

_sisters_] _sihers_ F2.

[4378] [Aside] Johnson.

[4379] _firstlings_] F1. _firstling_ F2 F3 F4.

[4380] _firstlings_] _firstling_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4381] _be it_] _be' t_ Pope.

[4382] _unfortunate_] _th' unfortunate_ Heath conj.

[4383] _him in_] om. Johnson conj.

_No ... fool_;] Omit as spurious, ending lines 153, 154 _do ...
sights!_ and reading _Where ... are_ as prose. Anon. conj.

[4384] _this purpose_] _the purpose_ Hanmer.

[4385] _sights_] _flights_ Collier (Collier MS. and Singer MS.).
_sprites_ Grant White.

[4386] SCENE II.] SCENE III. Pope.

Fife. Macduff's castle.] Macduff's Castle at Fife. Theobald. Macduff's
Castle. Rowe.

[4387] Enter Lady Macduff....] Rowe. Enter Macduffes Wife.... Ff.

[4388] L. Macd.] Wife. Ff (and throughout).

[4389] _diminutive_] F4. _diminitive_ F1 F3. _diminiuive_ F2.

[4390] _My ... coz_] _Dearest cousin_ Pope. _My dearest cousin_
Theobald.

[4391] _He is_] _He's_ Pope.

[4392] _The fits o'_] _What fits_ or _That fits_ Anon. conj.

_season_] _time_ Pope.

[4393] _know_] _know't_ Hanmer.

[4394] _we hold rumour ... we_] _we bode ruin ... we_ or _the bold
running ... they_ Johnson conj.

_rumour ... fear, yet_] _fear From rumor, and yet_ Becket conj.

[4395] _float upon_] _floating on_ Jackson conj.

[4396] _Each ... move._] _Each way and wave._ Theobald conj. _And
move each way._ Capell. _And each way move._ Keightley (Steevens
conj.). _Each way, and move--_ Johnson conj. _Each wail and moan._
Jackson conj. _Which way we move._ Ingleby conj. _And move each
wave._ Anon. conj.

[4397] _Shall_] _'T shall_ Hanmer. _It shall_ Keightley.

[4398] _Blessing ... discomfort_:] S. Walker would end the lines
_yet ... fool-- ... disgrace, ... discomfort._

[4399] _Father'd ... fatherless_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4400] [Exit.] Exit Rosse. Ff.

[4401] _with_] _on_ Pope.

[4402] _With_] _On_ Pope.

_I mean_] F1. om. F2 F3 F4.

[4403] _Poor ... lime_,] One line in Theobald. Two in Ff.

_lime_] F1. _line_ F2 F3 F4.

[4404] _The ... thee._] Capell ends the lines _mother?... father's ...
dead: ... Nay, ... buy me ... buy 'em ... wit; ... thee._

[4405] _Why ... for._] One line in Pope. Two in Ff.

[4406] _My father is_] _But my father's_ Capell, reading _Poor ...
father's_ as one line.

[4407] _Yes ... father?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_do_] _do now_ Capell.

[4408] _buy_] F3 F4. _by_ F1 F2.

[4409] _with all_] F2 F3 F4. _withall_ F1.

[4410] _and yet ... thee._] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[4411] _so?_] F3 F4. _so._ F1 F2.

[4412] _Every ... hang'd_.] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[4413] _the_] om. F3 F4.

[4414] _enow_] _enough_ Capell.

[4415] _Now_] om. F4.

[4416] _Now, God ... father?_] Prose first in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[4417] L. Macd.] Wife. F1 F3 F4. Son. F2.

[4418] _ones. To ... thus_,] _ones: To ... thus,_ F2 F3 F4. _ones
To ... thus._ F1.

[4419] _worse to you_] _less, to you_ Hanmer. _worship to you_
Warburton. _less to you,_ Capell.

[4420] [Exit.] Exit Messenger. Ff.

_Whither_] F3 F4. _Whether_ F1 F2.

[4421] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4422] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4423] _To say ... faces?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.]

_I have_] F1. _I had_ F2 F3 F4. _I'ad_ Pope. _I'd_ Theobald.

[4424] First Mur.] 1. M. Capell. Mur. Ff.

[4425] _shag-ear'd_] F3 F4. _shagge-ear'd_ F1 F2. _shag-hair'd_ Dyce
(Steevens conj.).

[Stabbing him.] Rowe. om. Ff.

[4426] _He has_] _H' as_ Pope.

[4427] _I pray_] _pray_ Pope.

[Dies.] Capell. om. Ff.

[Exit ...] Edd. (Globe ed.). Exit L. Macduff, crying Murther;
Murtherers pursue her. Theobald. Exit crying Murther. Ff.

[4428] SCENE III.] SCENE IV. Pope.

England. Before ...] Dyce. The King of England's Palace. Rowe. A Room
in Edward the Confessor's Palace. Capell. England. Steevens.

[4429] _down-fall'n_] _downfaln_ Warburton (Johnson). _downfall_ F1 F2
F3. _downfal_ F4. _down-fall_ Capell.

_birthdom_] Johnson, _birthdome_ F1 F2 F3. _birth-dome_ F4.
_birth-doom_ Pope. _birth-dame_ Johnson conj.

[4430] _syllable_] _syllables_ Pope.

[4431] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4432] _deserve_] Theobald (Walburton). _discerne_ F1 F2. _discern_ F3
F4.

_of him_] om. Steevens conj.

_and wisdom_] _'tis wisdom_ Hanmer. _and wisdom is it_ Steevens conj.
_and 'tis wisdom_ Collier conj. _and wisdom 'tis_ or _and wisdom
bids_ Staunton conj. _and wisdom 'twere_ Keightley.

[4433] _To offer_] _'Tis t' offer_ Nicholson conj.

[4434] _But ... crave_] _I crave_ Pope. _But 'crave_ Steevens (1793).

[4435] _wear_] _bear_ F4.

[4436] _still look_] _look still_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4437] _Perchance ... doubts._] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[4438] _child_] _childe_ F1. _children_ F2 F3F4.

[4439] _Without_] _Without so much as_ Anon. conj.

_I pray you_] om. Pope. _pray you_ S. Walker conj. _O Macduff, I
pray you_ Anon. conj.

[4440] _dare_] F1F2. _dares_ F3F4.

[4441] _The_] Ff. _His_ Pope. _Thy_ Malone.

_affeer'd_] Steevens, 1793 (Heath conj.). _affear'd_ F1F2. _afear'd_
F3. _afeard_ F4. _assur'd_ or _affirm'd_ S. Walker conj. _affeered_
Keightley.

_Fare_] _Far_ F1.

[4442] _think'st_] _think'st me_ Keightley.

[4443] _Of_] _Of aid of_ Keightley.

_but_] _but yet_ Hanmer.

[4444] _open'd_] _ripen'd_ Collier MS.

[4445] _evils_] _ills_ Pope.

Mal.] F1. Macb. F2 F3 F4.

[4446] _smacking_] F1 _smoaking_ F2 F3 F4.

_every_] _each_ Pope.

[4447] _cistern_] F3 F4. _cesterne_F1 F2.

[4448] _an_] _a_ Capell.

_Boundless_] om. Steevens conj.

[4449] _Convey_] _Enjoy_ Singer, ed. 2 (Collier MS.).

[4450] _cold, the ... hoodwink_:] Theobald. _cold. The ... hoodwinke_:
Ff. _cold. The ... hoodwink,_ Rowe. _cold: the ... hoodwink:_ Pope.

[4451] _We have_] _We've_ Pope.

[4452] _loyal_] _royal_ Pope.

[4453] _Sticks_] _Strikes_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.).

[4454] _summer-seeming_] _summer-teeming_ Theobald (Warburton).
_summer-seeding_ Rann (Heath conj.). _fume, or seething_ Johnson
conj. _summer-sinning_ Jackson conj. _summer-seaming_ Staunton conj.

[4455] _foisons_] _foysons_ F1 F2. _poison_ F3 F4. _foison_ Anon. conj.

[4456] _portable_] _bearable_ A. Hunter.

[4457] _Pour ... hell_] _Sow'r ... hate_ Hanmer _Sour ... hell_ Jackson
conj.

[4458] _Uproar_] F3 F4. _Uprore_ F1 F2. _Uproot_ Keightley.

[4459] _Fit ... miserable!_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[4460] _accursed_] _accurst_ F2 F3 F4. _accust_ F1.

[4461] _lived_] _liv'd_ Ff.

_Fare_] _Oh fare_ Pope.

[4462] _Have_] Rowe. _Hath_ Ff.

[4463] _thy_] _this_ Hanmer (1745).

[4464] _detraction_] _detractions_ Capell. conj.

[4465] _woman_] F1. _women_ F2 F3 F4.

_forsworn_] _forsworne_ F1. _forswore_ F2 F3 F4. _yet forsworn_ Hanmer
(1745).

[4466] _Whither_] _Whether_ F4.

_thy_] _they_ F1.

_here-approach_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

[4467] _Siward_] Theobald. _Seyward_ Ff.

[4468] _Already_] Ff. _All ready_ Rowe.

_at a point_] _at appoint_ Warburton.

_forth_] F1. _foorth?_ F2. _forth?_ F3 F4.

[4469] _the chance of goodness_] _our chance, in goodness_ Hanmer.
_the chance, O goodness,_ Johnson conj. _the chain of goodness_
Jackson conj.

[4470] _Be like_] _Be-link_ Jackson conj. _Belike_ Staunton.

_-warranted_] _unwarranted_ Capell (corrected in MS.).

[4471] SCENE V. Pope.

_Well ... you?_] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

[4472] _convinces_] _defeats_ A. Hunter.

[4473] [Exit Doctor.] Capell. Exit. Ff, after _amend._

[4474] _here-remain_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

[4475] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4476] _strangely-visited_] Hyphen inserted by Pope.

[4477] SCENE VI. Pope.

[4478] _God, betimes_] Capell. _God betimes_ Ff.

[4479] _The means_] Twice in F2 F3 F4.

_makes_] _make_ Hanmer.

[4480] _nothing_] _no one_ A. Hunter.

[4481] _rend_] Rowe. _rent_ Ff.

[4482] _dead man's_] Johnson, _dead-mans_ F1 F2. _dead-man's_ F3 F4.

[4483] _for who_;] _for whom?_ Pope.

[4484] _Dying_] _Die_ A. Hunter.

_or ere_] _or e'er_ Rowe.

_O, relation_] _Relation, oh!_ Hanmer.

[4485] _O, ... true_] As in Theobald. One line in Ff.

[4486] _Too ... true!_] _Too nice, yet true!_ Steevens conj.

_What's_] _What is_ Hanmer.

_newest_] _new'st_ S. Walker conj.

[4487] _goes't_] _gos't_ F1 F2 F3. _go's it_ F4.

[4488] _make our women_] _and make women_ Pope.

[4489] _We are_] _We're_] Pope.

[4490] _Siward_] Theobald. _Seyward_ Ff.

[4491] _latch_] _catch_ Rowe.

[4492] _What ... cause?_] Theobald. _What concerne they, The generall
cause,_ Ff. _What? concern they The gen'ral cause?_ Rowe.

[4493] _Hum Ha_ A. Hunter.

[4494] _Wife ...too?_] As in Capell. Two lines in Ff.

[4495] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4496] _He has_] _You have_ A. Hunter.

_All_] _What, all_ Hanmer, ending the previous line at _children._

[4497] _say all?_] _say all? what, all?_ Theobald.

[4498] _O hell-kite ... swoop?_] Put in the margin by Pope, who reads
instead _what, all?_

[4499] _O hell-kite!_] _O vulture! hell-kite!_ S. Walker conj.

_All?_] _what, all?_ Pope's margin.

[4500] _Dispute_] _Endure_ Pope.

_do so_] om. Pope.

[4501] _struck_] Rowe. _strooke_ F1 F2. _strook_ F3 F4.

[4502] _anger_] _wrath_ Pope.

[4503] _heavens_] _heav'n_ Pope.

[4504] _Scotland and myself_;] _Scotland and myself,_ Pope.
_Scotland, and my selfe_ Ff.

[4505] _Heaven_] _Then heaven_ Pope. _O God_, or _Then God_ Anon. conj.

_This tune_] Rowe (ed. 2). _This time_ Ff. _Thus, time_ Jackson conj.
Dunsinane.] Capell.

Ante-room ...] An Anti-chamber in Macbeth's Castle. Rowe.




ACT V.

SCENE I. _Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle._

        _Enter a_ Doctor of Physic _and a_ Waiting-Gentlewoman.

    _Doct._ I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive[4506]
    no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?

    _Gent._ Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen
    her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock
    her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it,      5
    afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this
    while in a most fast sleep.

    _Doct._ A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once
    the benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching! In this
    slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual          10
    performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?

    _Gent._ That, sir, which I will not report after her.[4507]

    _Doct._ You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.

    _Gent._ Neither to you nor any one, having no witness
    to confirm my speech.

                 _Enter_ LADY MACBETH, _with a taper_.

                          Lo you, here she comes![4508]               15
    This is her very guise, and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe
    her; stand close.

    _Doct._ How came she by that light?

    _Gent._ Why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually;
    'tis her command.                                                 20

    _Doct._ You see, her eyes are open.

    _Gent._ Ay, but their sense is shut.[4509]

    _Doct._ What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs
    her hands.

    _Gent._ It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus         25
    washing her hands: I have known her continue in this a
    quarter of an hour.

    _Lady M._ Yet here's a spot.

    _Doct._ Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes
    from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.[4510]      30

    _Lady M._ Out, damned spot! out, I say! One: two:
    why, then 'tis time to do't. Hell is murky. Fie, my lord,[4511]
    fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows[4512][4513]
    it, when none can call our power to account? Yet who[4513]
    would have thought the old man to have had so much                35
    blood in him?[4514]

    _Doct._ Do you mark that?

    _Lady M._ The thane of Fife had a wife; where is she[4515]
    now? What, will these hands ne'er be clean? No more
    o' that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this[4516]    40
    starting.

    _Doct._ Go to, go to; you have known what you should[4517]
    not.

    _Gent._ She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of
    that: heaven knows what she has known.                            45

    _Lady M._ Here's the smell of the blood still: all the[4518]
    perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh,
    oh, oh!

    _Doct._ What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.

    _Gent._ I would not have such a heart in my bosom for             50
    the dignity of the whole body.

    _Doct._ Well, well, well,--[4519]

    _Gent._ Pray God it be, sir.

    _Doct._ This disease is beyond my practice: yet I have
    known those which have walked in their sleep who have[4520]       55
    died holily in their beds.

    _Lady M._ Wash your hands; put on your nightgown;
    look not so pale: I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried;[4521]
    he cannot come out on 's grave.[4522]

    _Doct._ Even so?                                                  60

    _Lady M._ To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate:
    come, come, come, come, give me your hand: what's done
    cannot be undone: to bed, to bed, to bed.         [_Exit._[4523]

    _Doct._ Will she go now to bed?

    _Gent._ Directly.                                                 65

    _Doct._ Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds
    Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
    To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets:
    More needs she the divine than the physician.
    God, God forgive us all! Look after her;[4524]                    70
    Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
    And still keep eyes upon her. So good night:
    My mind she has mated and amazed my sight:[4525]
    I think, but dare not speak.

    _Gent._                      Good night, good doctor.

                                                        [_Exeunt._[4526]


SCENE II. _The country near Dunsinane._[4527]

         _Drum and colours. Enter_ MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS,
                     LENNOX, _and_ Soldiers.[4528]

    _Ment._ The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
    His uncle Siward and the good Macduff:[4529]
    Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes[4530][4531]
    Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm[4530][4532]
    Excite the mortified man.[4530]

    _Ang._                    Near Birnam wood[4530][4533]             5
    Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.

    _Caith._ Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?

    _Len._ For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file[4534]
    Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son,
    And many unrough youths, that even now[4535]                      10
    Protest their first of manhood.[4536]

    _Ment._                         What does the tyrant?

    _Caith._ Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies:
    Some say he's mad; others, that lesser hate him,[4537]
    Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,
    He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause[4538]                      15
    Within the belt of rule.

    _Ang._                   Now does he feel
    His secret murders sticking on his hands;
    Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
    Those he commands move only in command,
    Nothing in love: now does he feel his title                       20
    Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
    Upon a dwarfish thief.

    _Ment._                Who then shall blame
    His pester'd senses to recoil and start,
    When all that is within him does condemn
    Itself for being there?

    _Caith._                Well, march we on,[4539]                  25
    To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:
    Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,[4540]
    And with him pour we, in our country's purge,
    Each drop of us.

    _Len._           Or so much as it needs
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.                  30
    Make we our march towards Birnam.      [_Exeunt, marching._[4541]


SCENE III. _Dunsinane. A room in the castle._[4542]

               _Enter_ MACBETH, Doctor, _and_ Attendants.

    _Macb._ Bring me no more reports; let them fly all:
    Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane[4543]
    I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?[4544]
    Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know[4545]
    All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:[4546]             5
    'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman
    Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly, false thanes,[4547]
    And mingle with the English epicures:
    The mind I sway by and the heart I bear[4548]
    Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.[4549]             10

                           _Enter a_ Servant.

    The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon![4550]
    Where got'st thou that goose look?[4551]

    _Serv._ There is ten thousand--[4552]

    _Macb._                         Geese, villain?

    _Serv._                                         Soldiers, sir.

    _Macb._ Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
    Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?                      15
    Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
    Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?[4553]

    _Serv._ The English force, so please you.

    _Macb._ Take thy face hence.      [_Exit Servant._[4554]
                                Seyton!--I am sick at heart,[4555][4556]
    When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push[4555]                    20
    Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.[4557]
    I have lived long enough: my way of life[4558]
    Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
    And that which should accompany old age,
    As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,                    25
    I must not look to have; but, in their stead,
    Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,
    Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.[4559]
    Seyton!

                            _Enter_ SEYTON.

    _Sey._ What's your gracious pleasure?[4560]

    _Macb._                               What news more?[4561]       30

    _Sey._ All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.

    _Macb._ I'll fight, till from my bones my flesh be hack'd.[4562]
    Give me my armour.

    _Sey._             'Tis not needed yet.

    _Macb._ I'll put it on.
    Send out moe horses, skirr the country round;[4563]               35
    Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour.[4564]
    How does your patient, doctor?

    _Doct._                        Not so sick, my lord,
    As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies,
    That keep her from her rest.

    _Macb._                      Cure her of that.[4565]
    Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,[4566]                 40
    Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
    Raze out the written troubles of the brain,[4567]
    And with some sweet oblivious antidote
    Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff[4568]
    Which weighs upon the heart?

    _Doct._                      Therein the patient                  45
    Must minister to himself.[4569]

    _Macb._ Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it.
    Come, put mine armour on; give me my staff.[4570]
    Seyton, send out. Doctor, the thanes fly from me.
    Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast                50
    The water of my land, find her disease
    And purge it to a sound and pristine health,[4571]
    I would applaud thee to the very echo,
    That should applaud again. Pull't off, I say.
    What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug,[4572]                 55
    Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?

    _Doct._ Ay, my good lord; your royal preparation
    Makes us hear something.

    _Macb._                  Bring it after me.
    I will not be afraid of death and bane
    Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.[4573]                       60

    _Doct._ [_Aside_] Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,[4574]
    Profit again should hardly draw me here.      [_Exeunt._[4575]


SCENE IV. _Country near Birnam wood._

       _Drum and colours. Enter_ MALCOLM, _old_ SIWARD _and his_
     Son, MACDUFF, MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, ROSS, _and_
                         Soldiers, _marching_.

    _Mal._ Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand[4576]
    That chambers will be safe.

    _Ment._                     We doubt it nothing.

    _Siw._ What wood is this before us?

    _Ment._                             The wood of Birnam.[4577]

    _Mal._ Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
    And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow                     5
    The numbers of our host, and make discovery
    Err in report of us.

    _Soldiers._          It shall be done.

    _Siw._ We learn no other but the confident tyrant[4578]
    Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
    Our setting down before 't.

    _Mal._                 'Tis his main hope:                        10
    For where there is advantage to be given,[4579][4580]
    Both more and less have given him the revolt,[4579]
    And none serve with him but constrained things
    Whose hearts are absent too.

    _Macd._                      Let our just censures[4581]
    Attend the true event, and put we on[4581]                        15
    Industrious soldiership.

    _Siw._                   The time approaches,
    That will with due decision make us know
    What we shall say we have and what we owe.
    Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
    But certain issue strokes must arbitrate:                         20
    Towards which advance the war.                  [_Exeunt, marching._


SCENE V. _Dunsinane. Within the castle._[4582]

_Enter_ MACBETH, SEYTON, _and_ Soldiers, _with drum and colours_.[4583]

    _Macb._ Hang out our banners on the outward walls;[4584]
    The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength
    Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie
    Till famine and the ague eat them up:
    Were they not forced with those that should be ours,[4585]         5
    We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
    And beat them backward home.      [_A cry of women within._[4586]
                                 What is that noise?

    _Sey._ It is the cry of women, my good lord.      [_Exit._[4587]

    _Macb._ I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
    The time has been, my senses would have cool'd[4588]              10
    To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
    Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
    As life were in 't: I have supp'd full with horrors;[4589]
    Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
    Cannot once start me.

                           _Re-enter_ SEYTON.

                          Wherefore was that cry?[4590]               15

    _Scy._ The queen, my lord, is dead.[4591]

    _Macb._ She should have died hereafter;[4592]
    There would have been a time for such a word.[4592][4593]
    To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
    Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,[4594]                  20
    To the last syllable of recorded time;
    And all our yesterdays have lighted fools[4595]
    The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle![4596]
    Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player[4597]
    That struts and frets his hour upon the stage[4597]               25
    And then is heard no more: it is a tale[4597]
    Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
    Signifying nothing.

                          _Enter a_ Messenger.

    Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.

    _Mess._ Gracious my lord,[4598]                                   30
    I should report that which I say I saw,[4599]
    But know not how to do it.[4600]

    _Macb._                    Well, say, sir.

    _Mess._ As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
    I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,[4601]
    The wood began to move.

    _Macb._                 Liar and slave![4602]                     35

    _Mess._ Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so:
    Within this three mile may you see it coming;[4603]
    I say, a moving grove.

    _Macb._                If thou speak'st false,
    Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,[4604]
    Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,[4605]             40
    I care not if thou dost for me as much.
    I pull in resolution, and begin[4606]
    To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
    That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood[4601]
    Do come to Dunsinane;' and now a wood                             45
    Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out![4607]
    If this which he avouches does appear,[4608]
    There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.[4608][4609]
    I 'gin to be a-weary of the sun,[4608][4610]
    And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.[4608][4611]     50
    Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind! come, wrack![4612]
    At least we'll die with harness on our back.              [_Exeunt._


SCENE VI. _Dunsinane. Before the castle._[4613]

    _Drum and colours. Enter_ MALCOLM, _old_ SIWARD, MACDUFF, _and_
                   _their_ Army, _with boughs_.[4614]

    _Mal._ Now near enough; your leavy screens throw down,[4615]
    And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle,
    Shall, with my cousin, your right noble son,
    Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we[4616]
    Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,[4617]                  5
    According to our order.

    _Siw._                  Fare you well.[4618]
    Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night,
    Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.

    _Macd._ Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
    Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

                                                    [_Exeunt._[4619]  10


SCENE VII. _Another part of the field._[4620]

                     _Alarums. Enter_MACBETH.[4621]

    _Macb._ They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly,[4622]
    But bear-like I must fight the course. What's he
    That was not born of woman? Such a one
    Am I to fear, or none.

                      _Enter young_ SIWARD.[4623]

    _Yo. Siw._ What is thy name?

    _Macb._                      Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.

    _Yo. Siw._ No; though thou call'st thyself a hotter name[4624]
    Than any is in hell.

    _Macb._              My name 's Macbeth.

    _Yo. Siw._ The devil himself could not pronounce a title
    More hateful to mine ear.

    _Macb._                   No, nor more fearful.

    _Yo. Siw._ Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword[4625]       10
    I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.

                         [_They fight, and young Siward is slain._[4626]

    _Macb._                           Thou wast born of woman.
    But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
    Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.                   [_Exit._

                       _Alarums. Enter_ MACDUFF.

    _Macd._ That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
    If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine,                   15
    My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
    I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
    Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth,[4627]
    Or else my sword, with an unbatter'd edge,[4628]
    I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;                 20
    By this great clatter, one of greatest note
    Seems bruited: let me find him, fortune![4629][4630]
    And more I beg not.[4629]        [_Exit. Alarums._[4631]

                   _Enter_ MALCOLM _and old_ SIWARD.

    _Siw._ This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd:
    The tyrant's people on both sides do fight;                       25
    The noble thanes do bravely in the war;
    The day almost itself professes yours,[4632]
    And little is to do.

    _Mal._               We have met with foes[4633]
    That strike beside us.

    _Siw._                 Enter, sir, the castle.

                                                [_Exeunt. Alarum._[4634]


SCENE VIII. _Another part of the field._[4635]

                         _Enter_ MACBETH.[4636]

    _Macb._ Why should I play the Roman fool, and die
    On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes[4637]
    Do better upon them.

                         _Enter_ MACDUFF.[4638]

    _Macd._              Turn, hell-hound, turn!

    _Macb._ Of all men else I have avoided thee:
    But get thee back; my soul is too much charged                     5
    With blood of thine already.

    _Macd._                      I have no words:[4639]
    My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
    Than terms can give thee out!       [_They fight._[4640]

    _Macb._                       Thou losest labour:
    As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
    With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed:                     10
    Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
    I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
    To one of woman born.

    _Macd._               Despair thy charm,
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb                     15
    Untimely ripp'd.

    _Macb._ Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
    For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
    And be these juggling fiends no more believed,
    That palter with us in a double sense;                            20
    That keep the word of promise to our ear,
    And break it to our hope. I 'll not fight with thee.[4641]

    _Macd._ Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time:
    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,                       25
    Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,[4642]
    'Here may you see the tyrant.'[4643]

    _Macb._                        I will not yield,
    To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,
    And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
    Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,[4644]                    30
    And thou opposed, being of no woman born,[4645]
    Yet I will try the last: before my body
    I throw my warlike shield: lay on, Macduff;
    And damn'd be him that first cries 'Hold, enough!'[4646]

                                     [_Exeunt, fighting. Alarums._[4647]

   _Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours_, MALCOLM, _old_
        SIWARD, ROSS, _the other_ Thanes, _and_ Soldiers.[4648]

    _Mal._ I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.[4649]       35

    _Siw._ Some must go off: and yet, by these I see,
    So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

    _Mal._ Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

    _Ross._ Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt:
    He only lived but till he was a man;                              40
    The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd[4650]
    In the unshrinking station where he fought,
    But like a man he died.

    _Siw._                  Then he is dead?[4651]

    _Ross._ Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow[4652]
    Must not be measured by his worth, for then                       45
    It hath no end.

    _Siw._          Had he his hurts before?

    _Ross._ Ay, on the front.

    _Siw._                    Why then, God's soldier be he!
    Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
    I would not wish them to a fairer death:
    And so his knell is knoll'd.

    _Mal._                  He's worth more sorrow,                   50
    And that I'll spend for him.

    _Siw._                  He's worth no more:
    They say he parted well and paid his score:
    And so God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.[4653]

           _Re-enter_ MACDUFF, _with_ MACBETH'S _head_.[4654]

    _Macd._ Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands[4655]
    The usurper's cursed head: the time is free:                      55
    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl,[4656]
    That speak my salutation in their minds;
    Whose voices I desire aloud with mine:
    Hail, King of Scotland!

    _All._                  Hail, King of Scotland![4657]      [_Flourish._

    _Mal._ We shall not spend a large expense of time[4658]           60
    Before we reckon with your several loves,
    And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,[4659]
    Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
    In such an honour named. What's more to do,
    Which would be planted newly with the time,                       65
    As calling home our exiled friends abroad
    That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
    Producing forth the cruel ministers
    Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen,
    Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands[4660]             70
    Took off her life; this, and what needful else[4661]
    That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace[4662]
    We will perform in measure, time and place:
    So thanks to all at once and to each one,
    Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.[4663]                  75

                                                    [_Flourish. Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[4506] _two_] _too_ F1.

[4507] _report_] _repeat_ Warburton conj.

[4508] Lady Macbeth,] Rowe. Lady, Ff. Queen, Staunton.

[4509] _sense is_] Rowe. _sense are_ Ff. _sense' are_ Dyce (S. Walker
conj.).

[4510] [taking out his Tables. Capell.

_satisfy_] _fortifie_ Warburton.

[4511] _murky._] _murky!_ Steevens. See note (IX).

[4512] _afeard_] _afraid_ Rowe.

[4513] _fear who ... account?_] Theobald. _feare? who ... accompt_:
F1F2. _fear? who ... account_: F3F4. _fear who ... account_--Rowe
(ed. 2).

[4514] _him?_] Rowe. _him._ Ff.

[4515] [Sings. Nicholson conj.

[4516] _this_] F1. om. F2F3F4.

[4517] _Go ... not._] Prose in Pope. Two lines in Ff.

[4518] _of the blood_] F1F2. _of bloud_ F3F4.

[4519] _well,--_] _well--_ Rowe. _well._ Ff.

[4520] _which ... who_] _who ... to_ A. Hunter.

[4521] _Banquo's_] _Duncan's_ Hunter conj.

[4522] _on's_] _of his_ Pope. _of's_ Capell.

[4523] [Exit.] Exit Lady. Ff.

[4524] _God, God_] _Good God_ Pope.

[4525] _she has_] _she 'as_ Pope.

[4526] [Exeunt.] Exeunt severally. Capell.

[4527] The country ...] Capell. A Field with a Wood at Distance. Rowe.

[4528] Caithness,] Dyce. Cathnes. Ff.

and] om. Ff.

[4529] _Siward_] Theobald. _Seyward_ Ff.

[4530] _for ... man._] Omit as spurious, Anon. conj.

[4531] _causes_] Quoted _cause_ in Theobald's note.

[4532] _Would ... alarm_] F1. Omitted in F2F3F4.

[4533] _mortified_] _milkiest_ Anon. conj.

[4534] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4535] _unrough_] Theobald. _unruffe_ F1F2. _unruff_ F3F4. _unruff'd_
Pope. _unwrought_ Mason conj. _untough_ Collier MS.

[4536] _tyrant?_] F4. _tyrant._ F1F2F3.

[4537] _hate_] F1F2. _hates_ F3F4.

[4538] _cause_] _course_ Singer, ed. 2 (Collier MS. and S. Walker
conj.). _corse_ Anon. conj.

[4539] _there?_] Pope. _there._ Ff.

[4540] _medicine_] _Med'cine_ Ff. _medecin_ Steevens (Warburton conj.).
_med'cin_ Capell.

[4541] _Make we_] _Make me_ Theobald (ed. 1). _Make up_ Theobald (ed.
2).

_Birnam_] _Birnan_ F4.

[Exeunt, marching.] Ff. Exeunt. Rowe.

[4542] Dunsinane. A room in the castle.] Capell. The Castle. Rowe.
Dunsinane. Pope.

[4543] _Birnam_] F3 F4. _Byrnane_ F1. _Byrnam_ F2.

[4544] _taint_] _faint_ S. Walker conj.

[4545] _The spirits_] _Spirits_ Pope.

[4546] _consequences have_] _consequents_, Steevens (1793).

_me thus_] _it_ Pope. _me_ Capell.

[4547] _upon_] _on_ Steevens (1793).

_Then fly_] _Fly_ Pope.

[4548] _sway_] _stay_ Anon. conj.

[4549] Enter a Servant.] F3 F4. Enter Servant. F1 F2. Enter an
Attendant, hastily. Capell.

[4550] _loon_] F3. _loone_ F1 F2. _lown_ F4.

[4551] _goose_] _ghost_ Anon. apud Rann conj.

[4552] _is_] _are_ Rowe.

_thousand--_] Rowe. _thousand._ Ff.

[4553] _whey-face_] _whay-face_ Ff.

[4554] [Exit Servant.] Dyce. om. Ff.

[4555] _Seyton ... say!--_] Pointed as in Rowe. _Seyton, I ...
hart, ... behold: Seyton, I say,_ Ff.

[4556] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4557] _cheer_] F3 F4. _cheere_ F1 F2. _chair_ Dyce (Percy conj.).

_disseat_] Steevens (Jennens and Capell conj.). _dis-eate_ F1.
_disease_ F2 F3 F4.

[4558] _way_] _May_ Steevens, 1778, (Johnson conj.).

_of_] _off_ Jackson conj.

[4559] _and dare_] _but dare_ Reed (1803, 1813, 1821).

[4560] _Seyton!_] om. Rowe.

[4561] _What's_] _What is_ Pope.

[4562] _be_] F1. _is_ F2 F3 F4.

[4563] _moe_] F1 F2. _more_ F3 F4.

_skirr_] _scour_ A. Hunter.

[4564] _talk of_] F1 _stand in_ F2 F3 F4.

[4565] _Cure her_] F2 F3 F4. _Cure_ F1. _Make cure_ Anon. conj.

_of_] F1 F2. _from_ F3 F4.

[4566] _not_] om. Badham conj.

_a mind_] _minds_ Pope.

[4567] _Raze_] F1 F2. _Raise_ F3. _Rase_ F4.

[4568] _stuffd ... stuff_] _cloggd ... stuff_ or _stuffd ... load_
Staunton conj.

_stuffd_] _stufft_ F1. _stuft_ F2 F3 F4. _full_ Pope. _foul_ A. Hunter
(Steevens conj.). _fraught_ Anon. conj. _pressd_ Anon. conj.

_stuff_] F3 F4. _stuffe_ F1 F2. _tuft_ Jackson conj. _grief_ Collier
(Collier MS.). _matter_ Keightley. _slough_ Anon. conj.

[4569] _to_] F1. _unto_ F2 F3 F4.

[4570] _mine_] F1 F2 F3. _my_ F4.

[4571] _pristine_] _pristine_ F1.

[4572] _cyme_] _Cyme_ F1 _Caeny_ F2 F3. _senna_ F4. _clysme_ Badham
conj _sene_ Wellesley conj. _sirrah_ Bullock conj.

[4573] _Birnam_] _Birnane._ F1.

[Exit. Steevens (1793). Exeunt all except Doctor. Dyce.

[4574] [Aside] Hanmer.

[4575] [Exeunt.] Exit. Steevens (1793). Country ...] Edd. (Globe ed.).
A Wood. Rowe. Birnam Wood. Pope. Plains leading to Dunsinane; a Wood
adjacent. Capell. om. Steevens.

Drums and colours.] Ff. om. Rowe.

Enter ...] Enter Malcolme, Seyward, Macduffe, Seywards Sonne, Menteth,
Cathnes, Angus, and Soldiers Marching. Ff.

[4576] _Cousins_] _Cosins_ F1 F2. _Cousin_ F3 F4.

[4577] _Birnam_] F3 F4. _Byrnam_ F2. _Birnane_ F1.

[4578] _confident_] _confin'd_ Warburton.

[4579] _where ... have given_] _when ... do give_ A. Hunter.

[4580] _advantage to be given_] _a 'vantage to be gone_ Johnson conj.
_advantage to be gone_ Capell. _advantage to be got_ Steevens conj.
_advantage to be taken_ Keightley (Chedworth conj.). _advantage to
be gain'd_ Singer conj. (withdrawn). _advantage to be gotten_ Collier
(Collier MS.).

[4581] _Let ... Attend_] F1. _Let our best censures Before_ F2 F3
F4. _Set our best censures Before_ Rowe. _Let our best centuries
Before:--_ Jackson conj.

[4582] Dunsinane. Within....] Malone. The Castle. Rowe. Dunsinane.
Pope. The Castle of Dunsinane. Theobald. Before Dunsinane. Hanmer.
Dunsinane. A Plat-form within the Castle. Capell.

[4583] ... drums and colours.] ... Drum and Dolours. F3.... Drums and
Colours. F4.

[4584] _banners on ... walls_;] _banners on ... walls,_ Ff. _banners;
on ... walls_ Anon. conj.

[4585] _forced_] _'forc'd_ Hanmer. _farc'd_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[4586] [A cry ...] A Cry within of Women. Ff (after _noise?_).

[4587] [Exit.] Dyce. om. Ff. Retires. Collier conj. Enter an Attendant,
who whispers Seyton. Anon. conj.

[4588] _cool'd_] _'coil'd_ Malone conj. _quail'd_ Collier (Collier MS.).

[4589] _sup'd full_] _surfeited_ Hanmer.

[4590] _once_] _now_ Hanmer.

Re-enter Seyton.] Dyce. om. Ff.

[4591] _my lord_] om. Pope.

[4592] _died hereafter; There_] _died: hereafter There_ Jackson conj.

[4593] _time ... word._] _time for--Such a world!--_ Johnson conj.
(withdrawn).

[4594] _Creeps_] _Creep_ Capell conj.

[4595] _fools_] _foules_ Hunter conj.

[4596] _dusty_] F1. _study_ F2 F3 F4. _dusky_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.).

[4597] _A poor ... more_:] Omitted by A. Hunter.

[4598] _Gracious my_] F1. _My gracious_ F2 F3 F4.

[4599] _I say_] _I'd say_ Hanmer. om. Keightley, reading _Gracious ...
which_ as one line.

[4600] _do it_] Knight. _doo't_ F1 F2. _do't_ F3 F4.

_say_] _say it_ Pope.

[4601] _Birnam_] F4. _Byrnane_ F1. _Byrnam_ F2 F3.

[4602] [Striking him. Rowe.

[4603] _may you_] F1 F2. _you may_ F3 F4.

[4604] _shalt_] _shall_ F1.

[4605] _cling_] _clem_ Anon. conj.

[4606] _pull_] _pall_ A. Hunter (Johnson conj.).

[4607] _toward_] _towards_ Warburton.

[4608] _If ... undone._] Omit as spurious, Anon. conj.

[4609] _nor flying_] F1 F2. _no flying_ F3 F4.

[4610] _a-weary_] F1. _a weary_ F2 F3 F4. _weary_ Johnson.

[4611] _the estate_] _th' estate_ Ff. _the state_ Pope.

[4612] _Ring ... bell_] A stage direction, Theobald conj.

[4613] Dunsinane. Before ...] Before Macbeth's Castle. Rowe. Before
Dunsinane. Pope.

[4614] Drum and colours.] Ff. om. Rowe.

Enter ... old Siward ...] Enter ... Seyward ... Ff.

[4615] _Now ... down_,] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_leavy_] Ff. _leafy_ Collier.

[4616] _worthy_] _brave_ Pope.

[4617] _upon 's_] _upon us_ Capell.

[4618] _Do we_] _Let us_ Pope.

[4619] [Exeunt.] Capell. Exeunt. Alarums continued. Ff.

[4620] SCENE VII.] Scena Septima. Ff. Rowe, Pope, &c. continue the
Scene.

Another ...] The same. Another Part of the Plain. Capell.

[4621] Alarums.] Alarums, as of a Battle join'd. Skirmishings. Capell.
Alarums continued. Ff (at end of SCENE VI).

[4622] _They have_] _They've_ Pope.

[4623] Enter young Siward.] Theobald. Enter young Seyward. Ff (yong F2).

[4624] _hotter_] _hoter_ F1.

[4625] _abhorred_] F1. _thou abhorred_ F2 F3 F4.

[4626] [They fight ...] Fight, and young Seyward slaine. F1 F2 (yong
F2). Fight, and young Seyward's slain. F3 F4.

[4627] _either_] _or_ Pope.

[4628] _unbatter'd_] Rowe. _unbattered_ F1 F3 F4. _unbatterred_ F2.

[4629] _Seems ... And_] _As in_ Ff. One line in Hanmer.

[4630] _bruited_] _bruited there_ Steevens conj.

_find_] _but find_ Steevens conj.

[4631] Alarums.] Ff. Alarum. Rowe (ed. 2).

old Siward.] Seyward. Ff. Siward. Theobald. old Seyward. Capell.

[4632] _itself professes_] _professes itself_ Johnson.

[4633] _We have_] _We've_ Pope.

[4634] Alarum.] Ff. Alarums. Capell.

[4635] SCENE VIII]. Dyce. SCENE VII. Pope. Scene continued in Ff.

... field.] ... plain. Dyce.

[4636] Enter ...] Ff. Re-enter ... Capell.

[4637] _whiles_] _whilst_ Rowe.

[4638] Enter ...] Ff. Re-enter ... Capell.

[4639] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4640] [They fight.] Malone. Fight: Alarum. Ff. Fight. Capell.

[4641] _I'll_] _I will_ S. Walker conj., ending the lines _hope!...
coward._

[4642] _pole_] _cloth_ A. Hunter.

[4643] _I will_] _I'll_ Pope.

[4644] _Birnam_] F4. _Byrnane_ F1. _Byrnam_ F2F3.

[4645] _being_] _be_ Theobald.

[4646] _him_] _he_ Pope.

[4647] [Exeunt, fighting. Alarums.] Pope. Exeunt fighting. Alarums.
Enter Fighting, and Macbeth slaine. Ff. Exeunt, fighting. Capell.

[4648] Retreat. Flourish.] Retreat, and Flourish. Ff.

old Siward,] Seyward, Ff. Siward, Theobald, old Seyward, Capell.

the other Thanes,] Thanes, Ff. Lenox, Angus, Cathness, Menteth, Malone.

[4649] SCENE VIII. Pope.

[4650] _his prowess_] _he well_ A. Hunter.

[4651] _he is_] _is he_ Pope.

[4652] _cause_] _course_ Anon. conj.

[4653] _And so_] _So_ Pope. _And_ Collier MS.

_be with_] _b' wi'_ Anon. conj.

[4654] Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter ... Ff.

...head.] Ff.... head on a pole. Malone (from Holinshed).... head on a
pike. A. Hunter.

[4655] _Hail ... stands_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[Sticking the pike in the ground. Collier (Collier MS.).

[4656] _pearl_] F3F4. _pearle_ F1F2. _peers_ Rowe. _pearls_ Anon. conj.

[4657] _Scotland!_] _Scotland! hail!_ Hanmer.

All. _Hail_,] All. _All hail_, Anon. conj.

_Hail ... Scotland!_] _King of Scotland, hail!_ Steevens (1793).

[4658] _spend_] _make_ Keightley.

_expense_] _extent_ Steevens conj. _expanse_ Singer conj.

[4659] _My_] om. Pope.

[4660] _self and_] _self-laid_ Anon. conj.

[4661] _what_] _what's_ Hanmer.

[4662] _Grace_] _heaven_ Pope. _God_ Warburton.

[4663] Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Ff.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

I. 3. 21-24. Pope was the first to place the words 'Thus thou ...
undone' in inverted commas, and was followed substantially by all
subsequent editors with the exception of those we are about to mention.
Hanmer printed in italics 'This thou must do if thou have it' only, and
was followed by Capell and Mr. Staunton, except that they restore the
original reading 'Thus' for 'This.' Johnson proposed to read 'me' for
'it' in line 22, printing in italics the same words which Pope included
in inverted commas. His reading was adopted by Rann. Dr. A. Hunter
(Harry Rowe) read:

    'Thou'dst have, great Glamis,
    That which cries, _Thus than must do, if thou have me,_
    _And that's what rather thou dost fear to do,_
    _Than wishest should be undone_.'

Mr. Joseph Hunter (_New Illustrations &c. of Shakespeare_, II. p. 172)
proposed to mark the words 'Thus thou must do' only as a quotation, and
to read line 22 thus:

    'That which cries "Thus thou must do" if thou wouldst have it.'


NOTE II.

II. 1. 13, 14. The first Folio reads here:

    'He hath beene in vnusuall Pleasure,
    And sent forth great Largesse to your Offices.'

The second, followed substantially by the third and fourth:

    'He hath beene in unusuall pleasure.
    And sent forth a great Largesse to your Offices.'

Rowe altered 'Offices' to 'Officers.'

Pope reads:

    'He hath to-night been in unusual pleasure,
    And sent great largess to your officers.'

'To-night' was first introduced in Davenant's Version.

This reading was adopted by subsequent editors down to Capell,
inclusive. Steevens (1773) has:

    'He hath been in unusual pleasure;
    Sent forth great largess to your officers.'

Jennens first adopted the arrangement given in our text, though he
retained Rowe's emendation 'officers.'


NOTE III.

II. 1. 24. After this line Jennens proposes to add the following to
Banquo's speech:

    'Those lookers into fate, that hail'd you, _Cawdor_!
    Did also hail you, king! and I do trust,
    Most worthy _Thane_, you would _consent_ to accept
    What your deserts would grace, when offer'd you.'


NOTE IV.

II. 2. 35, 36. In the Folios and the earlier editors it is not clear
from the mode of printing where the words of the 'voice' ended. Hanmer
printed the whole in italics down to 'life's feast' in line 40,
omitting however line 37 with Pope. Johnson was the first to print only
the words 'Sleep no more! Macbeth doth murther sleep' as the cry of the
voice, supposing the remainder to be Macbeth's comment. In lines 42,
43, where the printing of the earlier editions is equally indecisive,
Hanmer prints from 'Glamis' to 'Macbeth shall sleep no more' in
italics, while Johnson prints only 'Glamis hath murder'd sleep' as the
cry of the voice.


NOTE V.

III. 1. 120-122. Dr. A. Hunter (Harry Rowe) arranges these lines as
follows:

    'But wail his fall whom I myself struck down:
    For certain friends there are, both his and mine,
    Whose loves I may not drop: and thence it is, &c.'


NOTE VI.

III. 2. 29-35. In these lines we have followed the arrangement of
Steevens (1793), which with the exception of the fourth and fifth lines
is the same as that of the Folios. The Folios divide the fourth and
fifth lines thus:

    'Vnsafe the while, that wee must laue
    Our Honors in these flattering streames.'

Rowe read them:

    'Unsafe the while, that we must lave our Honours
    In these so flattering streams,
    And make &c.'

Pope:

    'Unsafe the while, that we must lave our honours
    In these so flatt'ring streams, and make our faces
    Vizards t'our hearts, disguising what they are.

Capell rearranged the whole passage thus:

    'So shall I, love;
    And so, I pray, be you: let your remembrance
    Apply to Banquo; present him eminence, both
    With eye and tongue: Unsafe the while, that we
    Must lave our honours in these flattering streams;
    And make our faces vizards to our hearts.
    Disguising what they are.'

Steevens suggested that something was omitted, and proposed to read
'Unsafe the while it is for us, that we,' &c.


NOTE VII.

III. 4. 124. 'Augure,' as was pointed out by Mr. Singer, was used for
'augury.' In Florio's _World of Wordes_(1598), we find 'Augurio,
an _augure_, a soothsaying, a prediction, a signe, a coniecture, a
divination, a bad or ill hap, a wishing of good hap, a forboding.'


NOTE VIII.

IV. 1. 43. Rowe, from Davenant's version, prints the song thus:

    'Black Spirits and White,
    Blue Spirits and Gray,
    Mingle, mingle, mingle,
    You that mingle may.'

In the second line Malone printed 'Red spirits,' &c., following
Middleton's play of _The Witch_, Act V. Sc. 2.


NOTE IX.

V. 1. 32. _Hell is murky._ Steevens printed these words with a note
of exclamation after them, with the following note. 'She certainly
imagines herself here talking to Macbeth, who, (she supposes,) has
just said, _Hell is murky_, (i.e. hell is a dismal place to go to in
consequence of such a deed,) and repeats his words in contempt of his
cowardice.'

              CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




Transcriber's Notes:


    Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors were
    silently corrected.

    Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.

    Line wrapping retained in plays to retain prose numbering.

    Linenotes converted to footnotes with anchors at line ends.

    Incorrect line numbers retained, e.g. there are often more than
    5 lines (or occasionally less than 5) between increments of 5.

    Anchors assigned to linenotes without line references.

    Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE [CAMBRIDGE EDITION] [VOL. 7 OF 9] ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous oneâthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERGâ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayâyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenbergâ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase âProject
Gutenbergâ), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenbergâ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. âProject Gutenbergâ is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (âthe
Foundationâ or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenbergâ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenbergâ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenbergâ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenbergâ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenbergâ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase âProject Gutenbergâ appears, or with which the
phrase âProject Gutenbergâ is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase âProject
Gutenbergâ associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenbergâ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenbergâ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenbergâ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenbergâ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenbergâ¢ work in a format
other than âPlain Vanilla ASCIIâ or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenbergâ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original âPlain
Vanilla ASCIIâ or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenbergâ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenbergâ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    â¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenbergâ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenbergâ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, âInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.â
    
    â¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenbergâ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢
        works.
    
    â¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    â¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenbergâ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenbergâ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain âDefects,â such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the âRight
of Replacement or Refundâ described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenbergâ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you âAS-ISâ, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenbergâ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenbergâ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenbergâ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenbergâ¢

Project Gutenbergâ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergâ¢âs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenbergâ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenbergâ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundationâs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your stateâs laws.

The Foundationâs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundationâs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenbergâ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenbergâ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenbergâ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenbergâ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenbergâ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenbergâ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

